paper-title: Protein Binding and Functional Characterization of Plakophilin 2_ EVIDENCE FOR ITS DIVERSE ROLES IN DESMOSOMES AND β-CATENIN SIGNALING - ScienceDirect 

      JavaScript is disabled on your browser.
      Please enable JavaScript to use all the features on this page.
      Skip to main contentSkip to articleScienceDirectJournals & BooksHelpSearchMy accountTata Institute of Fundamental ResearchView PDFDownload full issueSearch ScienceDirectOutlineEXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURESRESULTSDISCUSSIONAcknowledgmentsREFERENCESCited by (188)Figures (10)Show 4 more figuresTables (1)Table IJournal of Biological ChemistryVolume 277, Issue 12, 22 March 2002, Pages 10512-10522MOLECULAR BASIS OF CELL AND DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGYProtein Binding and Functional Characterization of Plakophilin 2: EVIDENCE FOR ITS DIVERSE ROLES IN DESMOSOMES AND β-CATENIN SIGNALING*Author links open overlay panelXinyuChen‡, StefanBonné§, MechthildHatzfeld¶, Fransvan Roy§, Kathleen J.Green‡Show moreOutlineAdd to MendeleyShareCitehttps://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M108765200Get rights and contentUnder a Creative Commons licenseopen accessPlakophilins are a subfamily of p120-related arm-repeat proteins that can be found in both desmosomes and the nucleus. Among the three known plakophilin members, plakophilin 1 has been linked to a genetic skin disorder and shown to play important roles in desmosome assembly and organization. However, little is known about the binding partners and functions of the most widely expressed member, plakophilin 2. To better understand the cellular functions of plakophilin 2, we have examined its protein interactions with other junctional molecules using co-immunoprecipitation and yeast two-hybrid assays. Here we show that plakophilin 2 can interact directly with several desmosomal components, including desmoplakin, plakoglobin, desmoglein 1 and 2, and desmocollin 1a and 2a. The head domain of plakophilin 2 is critical for most of these interactions and is sufficient to direct plakophilin 2 to cell borders. In addition, plakophilin 2 is less efficient than plakophilin 1 in localizing to the nucleus and enhancing the recruitment of excess desmoplakin to cell borders in transiently transfected COS cells. Furthermore, plakophilin 2 is able to associate with β-catenin through its head domain, and the expression of plakophilin 2 in SW480 cells up-regulates the endogenous β-catenin/T cell factor-signaling activity. This up-regulation by plakophilin 2 is abolished by ectopic expression of E-cadherin, suggesting that these proteins compete for the same pool of signaling active β-catenin. Our results demonstrate that plakophilin 2 interacts with a broader repertoire of desmosomal components than plakophilin 1 and provide new insight into the possible roles of plakophilin 2 in regulating the signaling activity of β-catenin.Previous article in issueNext article in issuePKPplakophilinIFintermediate filamentPgplakoglobinDsgdesmogleinDscdesmocollinDPdesmoplakinDPNTPdesmoplakin N-terminal polypeptideIPimmunoprecipitationntnucleotide(s)kbkilobasePBSphosphate-buffered salineX-α-gal5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl α-d-galactopyranosideTCFT cell factorPlakophilins (PKPs)11–3 belong to a subfamily of p120-related armadillo proteins found in both the desmosomal plaque and the nucleus (1, 2, 3, 4, 5). Each is composed of a basic N-terminal head domain followed by a series of 10 imperfect 42-amino acid repeats (arm repeats) and a short C-terminal tail (3). Two splice variants have been identified for PKP1 and PKP2, a shorter “a” form and a longer “b” form. Although the N-terminal head domains of PKPs exhibit relatively greater sequence diversity than the arm-repeat domains, a consensus sequence termed HR2 is shared by all the PKP head domains (3, 4). PKP1 is concentrated in desmosomes of the suprabasal layers of stratified and complex epithelia (5). PKP3 can be detected in desmosomes of most simple and almost all stratified epithelia with the exception of hepatocytes and hepatocellular carcinoma cells (3, 4). PKP2 has the broadest tissue distribution in desmosomes of all simple, complex, and stratified epithelia as well as non-epithelial tissues such as myocardium and lymph node follicles, in which PKP1 was not detected in desmosomes. PKP2 is concentrated in the basal layer of most stratified squamous epithelia, whereas PKP1 is mostly concentrated in desmosomes of the upper layers (2, 3, 4, 6). On the other hand, PKP3 is more uniformly expressed in the living epidermal layers (3, 4). PKPs have been detected in both desmosomes and nuclei in desmosome-possessing cells and only in nuclei in desmosome-lacking cells, but the mechanisms responsible for this dual location and their functions in these two different environments are still poorly understood.Members of the armadillo family, to which PKPs belong, play critical structural and regulatory roles through their interactions with proteins in two related intercellular adhesive junctions, desmosomes and adherens junctions, which anchor intermediate filament (IF) networks and actin filaments to sites of cell-cell contact (7, 8, 9, 10). The best characterized interactions of the desmosomal armadillo proteins are those in which plakoglobin (Pg) participates. Pg associates directly with the cytoplasmic domains of the desmosomal cadherins, transmembrane glycoproteins of desmosomes that are further subdivided into the desmoglein (Dsg) and desmocollin (Dsc) subfamilies. Three isoforms exist for each of these subfamilies, which are expressed in a cell type- and differentiation-dependent manner (8, 11,12). Plakoglobin links desmosomal cadherins to IF through its interactions with the plakin family member desmoplakin (DP). Functionally, loss of Pg function through mutation or genetic ablation leads to heart and skin defects, supporting the fact that this link between the cadherins and the IF-desmoplakin complex plays a key role in tissue integrity (13, 14, 15).PKP1 also plays a critical role in tissue integrity, as patients null for PKP1 show histological evidence of aberrant desmosomes and poorly anchored IF and suffer from ectodermal dysplasia accompanied by skin fragility (16). Whereas DP in normal epidermis is concentrated in desmosomes, this plaque protein exhibits a largely diffuse, cytoplasmic distribution in PKP1 null patients. This observation raises the possibility that PKP1 is required for the efficient association of DP with the junctional plaque. Subsequent studies provided evidence supporting this hypothesis, showing that PKP1 can directly interact with the DP N terminus and enhance its recruitment to the plasma membrane. Furthermore, PKP1 collaborates with Pg and DP to promote the clustering of desmosomal plaque complexes at cell-cell borders and to enhance IF association with the plaque (17, 18, 19). Together, these results have led to the proposal that PKP1 is important in strengthening the desmosomal plaque by enhancing lateral protein-protein interactions. However, virtually nothing is known about the roles of other PKPs in desmosomes and how their participation in desmosomes affects the specific organization or functions of desmosomes in different tissues and stages of differentiation.In addition to their function in intercellular junctions, some armadillo family members also play roles in cellular activities outside of the junctions. Both Pg (20) and p120 (21) have been found in the nucleus and implicated in various signaling pathways (22, 23, 24, 25, 26); however, the best-studied example is β-catenin. This close relative of Pg connects the cytoplasmic tails of classical cadherins with actin-binding proteins such as α-catenin to provide the linkage between actin filaments and adherens junctions (27). Besides its important roles in cell-cell adhesion, β-catenin is a critical downstream effector of the Wnt-signaling pathway, which mediates a large variety of developmental processes (28, 29). The cellular level of β-catenin is tightly controlled by a complex of proteins that facilitates its rapid degradation, whereas activation of the Wnt-signaling pathway antagonizes the degradation process and leads to the accumulation of free, cytoplasmic β-catenin. β-Catenin can then translocate into the nucleus and activate target gene transcription in association with TCF/Lef1 transcription factors (30). Since the recognition of its role in Wnt signaling, an increasing number of proteins have been discovered to interact with β-catenin and regulate its signaling activity through various mechanisms (31). PKPs, like their armadillo family relatives, are also found in the nucleus. So far evidence for participation of PKPs in β-catenin-dependent signaling has not been reported. A recent study showed that nuclear PKP2 is complexed with the RNA polymerase III holoenzyme and interacts directly with its largest subunit RPC155 in vitro, opening up additional possibilities for the nuclear activity of PKP2 (32). However, because only a subset of PKP2 was observed in these complexes, other nuclear functions for this arm-repeat subfamily of proteins may exist.PKP2 is the most ubiquitously expressed PKP family member, suggesting that it has broad cellular functions. In this study, to elucidate the biological functions of PKP2, we have characterized its protein interactions with other junctional molecules. Here we show that PKP2 interacts directly with the obligate desmosome components Pg and DP as well as the desmosomal cadherins Dsg1, Dsg2, Dsc1a, and Dsc2a and may interact indirectly with Dsg3. PKP2 is less efficient than PKP1 in enhancing the recruitment of excess DP to cell borders, which is consistent with the weaker interaction observed between PKP2 and DP and indicates distinct roles for these two PKPs in desmosome assembly. In addition, PKP2 can associate with non-cadherin-bound β-catenin and regulate its signaling activity in TOPFLASH reporter assays. This novel association with a component of adherens junctions and the Wnt-signaling pathway raises the possibility that PKP2 might participate in cross-talk between the two major types of intercellular junctions and signal transduction pathways connecting the cell surface and the nucleus.EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURESGeneration of cDNA ConstructsTo generate the probe used for library screening, a partial PKP2 cDNA clone in pRSET-A vector (p673) was digested with BamHI and NcoI to isolate the insert nucleotides 1009–2401 of the PKP2 a splicing variant (PKP2a) cDNA. Numbering of the PKP2a cDNA sequence is based on the mRNA sequence for PKP2a and 2b (GenBankTMaccession number X97675) and the protein sequence of PKP2a (GenBankTM accession number CAA66265). This fragment was used to screen a normal humankeratinocyte λZAPII library (provided by Dr. Masayuki Amagai). Clone (C1-1) containing PKP2a nucleotides 1–1849 was digested with KpnI andEcoRI to purify the fragment containing PKP2a nucleotides 1–1318, which was ligated into the EcoRI andKpnI sites of pBS vector to generate plasmid p793 (nt 1–1318). p793 was digested with XbaI, end-filled, and then digested with KpnI to cut out the insert, which was then ligated into a 3.4-kb fragment of p673, which had been digested withNcoI, end-filled, and digested with KpnI. The resulting plasmid p792 contains PKP2a nucleotides 1–2401 in pBS. To obtain the missing C terminus of PKP2a (nt 2402–2514), PCR was performed using the total phage DNA isolated from the above library with forward primer XC5′ (5′-GGACCAATGCCAACATC-3′) and reverse primer XC3′ (5′-GTCGACGTCTTTAAGGGAG-3′). The resulting PCR product, spanning nucleotides 2008–2511 and containing an engineered SalI site at the 3′ end, was directly cloned into the pGEM-T vector (Promega) to generate clone XC1–4. XC1–4 was double-digested withMscI and SphI to isolate the C terminus of PKP2a, which was then cloned into the 4.9-kb fragment of p792 digested withMscI and SphI, thus creating the complete PKP2a cDNA in pBS (p829). Complete sequencing of the PKP2a cDNA revealed three nucleotide differences compared with the originally published PKP2a sequence (2) (GenBankTM accession numberX97675). The first difference is a C to T transition at nt 1097 that changes a Pro to Leu. Because this difference came from a phage clone and was also found in multiple EST clones, it was considered as a polymorphic difference in the PKP2a cDNA sequence. The other two differences are a G to T change at nt 1886 and an A to G change at nt 2164, both of which were found in PCR-generated plasmid p673 and were not present in any EST clones in the GenBankTM data base. So they were interpreted as errors introduced by the cloning process and corrected as described below.A mammalian expression construct of PKP2a (p830) was constructed by ligating an EcoRI-SalI fragment from p829 into pFLAG-CMV-5 vector. The two random mutations at PKP2a cDNA sequence 1886 and nt 2164 were corrected using the QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene), and the resulting plasmid (p915) was fully sequenced to ensure that there were no additional mutations. Construct p915 is the expression construct for PKP2a used in this study. The N-terminal head domain of PKP2a (PKP2a-H) was generated by PCR using primers PHN (5′-GATGAATTCCACGATGGCAGCCCCCG-3′) and PHC (5′-CATGTCGACGTCTGCATTCCCCAGC-3′) with p915 as the template. The PCR product contains an EcoRI site and a Kozak consensus sequence at the 5′ end and a SalI site at the 3′ end. After ligation of the PCR product into pGEM-T vector and subsequent digestion with EcoRI and SalI, the PKP2a head domain (nt 1–1044) was ligated into pFLAG-CMV-5. The procedure of generating the remaining portion of PKP2a (PKP2a-A) including the arm-repeat domain and the C terminus into the pFLAG-CMV-5 vector was the same as above except for the primers used in the PCR reaction. The forward primer used was PAN (5′-GATGAATTCCACGATGGAGATGACTCTGGAG-3′), and the reverse primer was PAC (5′-CATGTCGACGTCTTTAAGGGAGTGGTAGGC-3′). To generate the full-length PKP1a with a FLAG-epitope tag at its C terminus, a full-length a form of PKP1 in pCMV script vector p724 (19) was used as the template for PCR using primers PKP1-nt-1745 (5′-CCTGCAATCTGGCAACTCTG-3′) and PKP1.FLAG (5′-CCTACTTGTCATCGTCGTCCTTGTAATCGAATCGGGAGGTGAAG-3′). The PCR product that contains a FLAG epitope tag at its C terminus was subsequently blunt end-ligated into pSK vector digested withEcoRV. This intermediate construct was diagnostically digested to determine the orientation of the PCR insert and was double-digested with BstEII and SalI to isolate the PCR insert, which was then ligated into p724 digested withBstEII and SalI to generate full-length FLAG-tagged PKP1a in pCMV script vector.The HR2 domain of PKP2a contains amino acids 29–60. To generate the expression construct of PKP2a with internal deletion of its HR2 domain (PKP2a ΔHR2), a SOEing (splicing by overlapextension) procedure was utilized. PCR was performed with p915 as the template using primer A (5′-GTATCATATGCCAAGTC-3′) and primer B (5′-GGCGAGGGTCTGCTGGGAGCTGTCCAGTTG-3′) to obtain the PCR product AB. A second PCR was performed with p915 as the template using primer C (5′-CAGCAGACCCTCGCC-3′) and primer D (5′-CTGCAGAAGCTTGAGG-3′) to obtain the PCR product CD. Then the final PCR was performed with a mixture of product AB and CD as the template using primer A and primer D to produce the PCR product AD. Product AD was digested withNdeI and HindIII and cloned into the 5.6-kb fragment from digesting p915 with NdeI andHindIII, thus creating PKP2a ΔHR2. It was then used as the template to generate the PKP2a head domain with HR2 deletion (PKP2a-H ΔHR2) following the same procedure described above for generating PKP2a-H. To generate full-length DP with a C-terminal Myc tag, a plasmid (p350) pCMV.DP.myc, which has a stop codon at nucleotide position 1754 due to mutation, was digested with DraIII andSalI. The 7.5-kb fragment was ligated with the 5.1-kb fragment from DraIII and SalI digestion of plasmid p612, pSK.DP.ΔC. This ligation generates full-length DP in the pCMV vector with a C-terminal Myc tag (p613).The following constructs were described previously: full-length human Pg cDNA in a mammalian expression vector LK44 under the control of the human β-actin promoter (33); the PgΔN and PgΔC expression constructs under the control of the β-actin promoter (34); an expression construct encoding a polypeptide comprising the first 584 amino acids of DP, called DPNTP (35). Full-length β-catenin in mammalian expression vector pCAN was provided by Dr. Paul Polakis.Mammalian expression constructs of full-length human Dsg1 with a C-terminal Myc tag and full-length human Dsg2 with a C-terminal Myc tag were described previously (33, 36). The full-length human Dsg3 with C-terminal Myc tag in the expression vector was a gift from Dr. John Stanley.Cell Culture and TransfectionsCOS-7, HEK293, A431, and HaCaT cells were cultured in Dulbecco's minimal essential medium with penicillin/streptomycin and 10% fetal bovine serum. The SCC9 oral squamous cell carcinoma cells were grown in Dulbecco's minimal essential medium/F-12 medium with 10% fetal bovine serum and penicillin/streptomycin. The SW480 human colon carcinoma cell line was cultured in Leibovitz's L-15 medium supplemented with penicillin/streptomycin and 10% fetal bovine serum. For transient transfection of COS cells and HEK293 cells, calcium phosphate transfection was performed as previously described (37), and experiments were performed 42–46 h later. SCC9 and SW480 cells were transfected using FuGENE 6 reagent (Roche Applied Science) according to the manufacturer's protocol and assayed 24 h later.AntibodiesA rabbit polyclonal antibody poly-Myc 2026 directed against the c-Myc epitope and a rabbit polyclonal antibody 1880 against Dsg3 were kindly provided by Dr. John Stanley. A rabbit polyclonal antibody against E-cadherin was a gift from Drs. Randy Marsh and Robert Brackenbury. A mouse monoclonal antibody PC28 directed against the DP central rod domain was a gift from Dr. Pamela Cowin. A monoclonal anti-c-Myc antibody 9E10 and rabbit polyclonal antibodies against β-catenin (C2206) and α-catenin (C2081) were purchased from Sigma. A monoclonal anti-β-catenin antibody C19220 was obtained from Transduction Laboratories. A rabbit polyclonal antibody Oct-A probe against the FLAG epitope was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. The following antibodies were described previously: rabbit polyclonal antibodies NW161 (35) and NW6 (38), directed against desmoplakin; a chicken polyclonal antibody 1407 (39), directed against plakoglobin; a mouse monoclonal antibody 6D8, directed against Dsg2 (35, 40).Co-immunoprecipitation, Immunoblot, and Sequential Detergent ExtractionFor co-immunoprecipitations, 100 or 60 mm dishes of cells were washed in PBS, extracted in 1 ml or 500 μl of cold co-immunoprecipitation buffer containing 1% Triton X-100, 145 mm NaCl, 10 mm Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 5 mm EDTA, 2 mm EGTA, and 1 mmphenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. Lysates were then processed for immunoprecipitation as described previously (41) using specific antibodies. For immunoprecipitation of FLAG-tagged proteins, anti-FLAG® M2-agarose affinity gel (Sigma) was used. Immunocomplexes were separated on 7.5% polyacrylamide gels and electrophoretically transferred to nitrocellulose, which was blocked with 5% dry milk in PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20 and probed with appropriate primary and secondary antibodies (Kirkegaard and Perry Laboratories) diluted in 5% dry milk in PBS. Sequential detergent extraction was performed as described (34) except that the amount of buffer used at each step was adjusted so that the final volume of each pool was 400 μl.ImmunofluorescenceCells were plated on glass coverslips the day before transfection in 6-well tissue culture dishes. 24 h after transfection using FuGENE 6 reagent, cells were washed in PBS, fixed in methanol for 2 min at −20 °C, and incubated with appropriate antibodies diluted in complete PBS. Cells were incubated with primary antibodies for 30 min at 37 °C, washed, and incubated with secondary antibodies for 30 min at 37 °C. The following antibodies were used at indicated dilutions: PC28 at 1:200, C2206 at 1:50, C19220 at 1:50, Oct-A-probe at 1:50, Alexa Fluor®-conjugated goat anti-mouse or goat anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) were used at 1:300. Images were obtained on a Leitz DMR microscope using a Hamamatsu Orcal digital camera and Openlab imaging software (Improvision).Yeast Two-hybrid Constructs and AssaysThe plakoglobin construct lacking the N-terminal domain (PgΔN) in pACTII vector was described previously (p515) (42). The cDNA sequence encoding PgΔN was removed from p515 by digestion with NcoI andXhoI and subcloned into the same sites of pAS-CYH2 to create PgΔN in pAS-CYH2. Plasmid p525, which contains cDNA sequence of DPNTP in pBluescript (42), was digested with BamHI andSalI, and DPNTP was subcloned into the BamHI andXhoI sites of pACTII vector (p900). The PKP1a head domain in DNA binding domain vector pBD-GAL4 (Stratagene) was described previously (19). The intracellular domains of Dsg1, Dsg2, Dsg3, Dsc1a, and Dsc2a in pGAD424 vector were described previously (18). These inserts were removed from the pGAD424 vector by digestion withEcoRI and SalI and cloned into theEcoRI and XhoI sites of pGADT7 vectors. The mouse E-cadherin cytoplasmic domain comprises amino acids 741–884 and was generated by PCR with primers containing EcoRI andSalI sites and cloned into the EcoRI andXhoI sites of pGADT7. Full-length human β-catenin was cloned into the SmaI and BamHI sites of pGAD424. Both the human p120 catenin isoform 3AC and the cytoplasmic domain of protocadherin β 15 were cloned into the EcoRI andSalI sites of pGBKT7. Full-length PKP2a, its head domain, and the headless portion of PKP2a were amplified by PCR and cloned into the SmaI site of pAS-CYH2 vector and confirmed by DNA sequencing.To assay interactions between proteins, yeast strain Y189 or AH109 was co-transformed with two testing plasmids, and dual transformants were selected by growth on plates lacking both tryptophan and leucine. Transformations were performed according to methods in the MatchmakerTM two-hybrid product protocol (CLONTECH Laboratories Inc.). Briefly, competent yeast cells were transformed with 1–5 μg of each plasmid DNA using a standard lithium acetate/polyethylene glycol method. For the Y189 strain, positive interactions were quantified by measuring the β-galactosidase activity using 4-mythylumbelliferyl β-d-galactopyranoside as a substrate following the methods described before (43). For AH109 strain, dual transformants were tested for their ability to grow on SD-Leu-Trp-His-Adeplates and their ability to turn blue in the presence of X-α-gal. Materials for base media and agar were purchased from Difco, and materials for the defined media were purchased from CLONTECH Laboratories Inc.TOPFLASH Luciferase AssayTOPFLASH and FOPFLASH luciferase reporter gene constructs were generously provided by Dr. Bert Vogelstein. TOPFLASH reporter gene construct contains optimized TCF-binding sites upstream of a luciferase reporter gene, whereas the FOPFLASH contains mutated sites that do not bind TCF (44). SW480 cells were seeded at 2.75 × 105 cells/well in 6-well dishes 24 h before transfection. Each well was transfected with 0.25 μg of either TOPFLASH or FOPFLASH, 0.05 μg of pRL-TK (Promega) as an internal control for transfection efficiency, and 1 μg of each indicated test construct. The total amount of DNA in each transfection was kept constant by the addition of an empty expression vector plasmid (pCMV-FLAG). Transfections were performed in triplicate using FuGENE 6 reagent (Roche Applied Science), and luciferase assays were performed 24 h later following the protocol provided for the Dual-Luciferase™ reporter assay system (Promega). Luciferase activity was corrected for transfection efficiency by using the control pRL-TK activity. Each experiment was performed at least three times independently.RESULTSThe Head Domain of PKP2a Is Sufficient for Its Cell Border LocalizationBecause PKP1a associates with desmosomal components and is targeted to desmosomes through its head domain (18), we tested whether the PKP2 head domain is similarly responsible for its localization to cell borders. PKP2a, PKP2a-H, or PKP2a-A (Fig.1) were transiently transfected into the SCC9 keratinocytes, and their subcellular distribution was examined with respect to the endogenous desmosomal marker DP. Ectopic full-length PKP2a was distributed primarily in a continuous fashion along cell borders (Fig. 2a), which overlapped, but was not completely coincident, with the punctate discontinuous pattern exhibited by endogenous DP (Fig. 2b). This distribution pattern of PKP2a suggests that overexpressed PKP2a might be associated with non-desmosomal components at the plasma membrane.Download: Download high-res image (121KB)Download: Download full-size imageFigure 1. Schematic diagram of plakophilin constructs used in this study. The top two constructs are full-length PKP1a and PKP2a. Deletion constructs of PKP2a were generated including the PKP2a head domain (PKP2a-H), the PKP2a headless fragment containing the arm-repeat domain and C-terminal tail (PKP2a-A). The HR2 domain of PKP2a (amino acids 29–60) was internally deleted to generate PKP2a with deletion of the HR2 domain (PKP2a ΔHR2) and PKP2a head domain with deletion of HR2 domain (PKP2a-HΔHR2). The numbers indicate amino acid position, and the black box represents the HR2 domain. PKPs have 10 arm-repeats, shown as open boxes. All the constructs were C-terminally tagged with a FLAG epitope (star).Download: Download high-res image (339KB)Download: Download full-size imageFigure 2. The head domain of PKP2a is sufficient for its border localization. SCC9 cells, which assemble numerous desmosomes, were transiently transfected with PKP2a (a and b), the deletion constructs PKP2a-H (c and d), or PKP2a-A (e andf). 24 h after transfection, cells were processed for double-label immunofluorescence using the polyclonal antibody Oct-A-probe to detect the FLAG epitope of ectopic polypeptides (a, c, and e) and the monoclonal antibody PC28 to detect endogenous DP (b, d, andf). Both PKP2a and its head domain are distributed in the cytoplasm and along cell borders, where they partially colocalize with endogenous DP (a–d). PKP2a-A is diffuse throughout the cytoplasm without specific border localization (e). PKP2a head domain is often found to concentrate in the nucleus (c). Scale bar, 10 μm.The head domain of PKP2a (PKP2a-H) colocalized more extensively with endogenous DP and appeared more punctate compared with full-length PKP2a (Fig. 2c). In addition, the PKP2a head domain was detected in the cytoplasm as discrete dots. In contrast to full-length ectopic PKP2a, which was rarely seen concentrated in the nucleus, in about 50% of the transfected cells the PKP2a head domain was detected in the nucleus. The PKP2a head domain was also localized to both cell borders and the nucleus in Madin-Darby canine kidney, HeLa, and COS cells (data not shown), reminiscent of the intracellular localization reported for the PKP1a head domain (17, 18). In contrast, PKP2a-A exhibited a largely diffuse distribution throughout the cytoplasm without any specific pattern or cell border localization. Cells overexpressing PKP2a-A were also frequently found to form many filopodia-like membrane protrusions and to have altered morphology. These results suggest that the PKP2a head domain, which also has the ability to accumulate in the nucleus, is sufficient for the membrane targeting of PKP2a.PKP2a Co-immunoprecipitates with DP and the N-terminal 584 Amino Acids Polypeptide DPNTPIt was shown previously that PKP1a interacts directly with the N-terminal domain of DP and enhances the recruitment of ectopic and endogenous DP to cell-cell borders (18, 19). To compare the ability of PKP2a and PKP1a to interact with DP, full-length DP or DPNTP was transiently expressed in HEK293 cells with or without one of the PKP constructs, followed by immunoprecipitation using M2-agarose to precipitate FLAG-tagged PKP1a or PKP2a and the associated proteins. As shown in Fig. 3, like PKP1a, PKP2a co-immunoprecipitated DP and DPNTP. Neither DP nor DPNTP was nonspecifically detected in the immunocomplexes with M2-agarose when expressed alone. Although similar amounts of PKP1a and PKP2a were immunoprecipitated by M2-agarose, substantially more full-length DP or DPNTP was present in the immunocomplex with PKP1a, suggesting that DP may interact more robustly with PKP1a than with PKP2a. This possible difference in the strength of the interactions between DP and two plakophilins was further supported by yeast two-hybrid results (Fig. 6).Download: Download high-res image (206KB)Download: Download full-size imageFigure 3. PKP2a co-immunoprecipitates both full-lengthDPand its N-terminal polypeptideDPNTP. DP or DPNTP was transiently expressed in HEK293 cells either alone or together with FLAG-tagged PKPs, which were then immunoprecipitated by M2-agarose, which binds the FLAG epitope of ectopic PKPs. The cell lysates and immunocomplexes were analyzed by Western blot to detect DP and DPNTP using the anti-DP antibody NW161 and to detect ectopic PKPs using the anti-FLAG antibody Oct-A-probe. Both PKP1a and PKP2a specifically co-precipitate DP and DPNTP, but more DP and DPNTP are found to be co-immunoprecipitated by PKP1a than by PKP2a. The variable levels of DP and DPNTP observed in cell lysates are likely due to promoter competition that results from transfection of multiple plasmids.Download: Download high-res image (142KB)Download: Download full-size imageFigure 6. PKP2a interacts directly withDPNTPandPgΔN in yeast two-hybrid assays. Yeast strain Y187 cells were co-transformed with DPNTP or PgΔN in pACTII vector and various PKP constructs as indicated. Co-transformants were selected on plates lacking tryptophan and leucine (−Trp/−Leu), and individual clones were used for quantitative β-galactosidase assay. Each bar represents the average of triplicate measurements for an independent clone. Interaction between p53 and large T antigen (LgT) is shown as a positive control. The measurements for the interactions between PKP2a-A and either DPNTP or Pg ΔN are negligible. DPNTP interacts most strongly with PKP1a head domain and at a much weaker level with both PKP2a and its head domain. PgΔN directly interacts with PKP2a and its head domain but not with PKP2a-A. No significant measurements were obtained from clones co-transformed with PKP constructs and pACTII empty vector (data not shown). MUG, 4-mythylumbelliferyl β-d-galactopyranoside.PKP2a Co-immunoprecipitates Pg and the Arm-repeat Domain of Pg Is Sufficient for This AssociationIn a previous study, it was reported that PKP1a was unable to interact with Pg in anin vitro overlay assay (45). Here, the ability of PKP1 and PKP2 to interact with Pg was compared by co-immunoprecipitation from transiently transfected COS cells. In agreement with previous findings, we detected little or no Pg association with PKP1a (Fig.4A). In contrast, when Pg was co-expressed with FLAG-tagged PKP2a in COS cells followed by immunoprecipitation using M2-agarose, Pg was efficiently co-precipitated together with PKP2a (Fig. 4B). Deletion of either the N-terminal head or C-terminal tail of Pg did not adversely affect its association with PKP2a, indicating that the Pg arm-repeat domain primarily mediates the interaction. A similar amount of PKP2a co-immunoprecipitated considerably more PgΔC than either PgΔN or full-length Pg. Next, the ability of the PKP2a head domain (PKP2a-H) and PKP2a arm-repeats with the C-terminal tail (PKP2a-A) to co-immunoprecipitate Pg was tested (Fig. 4C). PKP2a-H co-precipitated less Pg compared with full-length PKP2a, and PKP2a-A was even less efficient in doing so, considering the much higher amount of PKP2a-A present in the cell lysates and the immunocomplex.Download: Download high-res image (163KB)Download: Download full-size imageFigure 4. PKP2a co-immunoprecipitatesPgand its terminal deletion mutants.A, PKP1a is unable to co-immunoprecipitate Pg efficiently. Pg was expressed either alone or together with FLAG-tagged PKP1a followed by immunoprecipitation with M2-agarose and Western blot analysis with 1407 and Oct-A-probe.B, terminal domains of Pg are not essential for its association with PKP2a. Pg and its deletion mutants were transiently expressed in COS cells either alone or together with FLAG-tagged PKP2a followed by immunoprecipitation with M2-agarose and Western blot analysis. An anti-Pg polyclonal antibody 1407 was used to detect Pg, and anti-FLAG antibody Oct-A-probe was used to detect FLAG-tagged PKP2a. PKP2a co-immunoprecipitates Pg and its deletion mutants lacking either the N-terminal or C-terminal domain. C, deletion of the head or arm-repeat domain of PKP2a abrogates its association with Pg. Pg was transfected either alone or together with different FLAG-tagged PKP2a constructs followed by immunoprecipitation with M2-agarose and Western blot analysis. The ability of PKP2a to co-precipitate Pg is severely compromised by the deletion of PKP2a arm-repeat domain plus C-terminal tail and almost completely abolished by the deletion of PKP2a head domain.PKP2a Co-immunoprecipitates Dsg1 and Dsg2 but Not Dsg3 When Co-expressed in COS Cells, and the HR2 Domain of PKP2a Is Not Necessary for Its Complex Formation with Other Desmosomal ComponentsTo investigate possible interactions between PKP2a and the three desmoglein isoforms Dsg1, -2, and -3, co-immunoprecipitation experiments were performed using lysates from transiently transfected COS cells. PKP2a specifically co-immunoprecipitated both Dsg1 and Dsg2 but not Dsg3 (Fig. 5A). The PKP2a head domain, but not its arm-repeat domain, mediated the interaction between PKP2a and Dsg2 (data not shown). The parallel experiment could not be successfully performed with Dsg1 due to quenched expression of the Dsg1 construct when co-transfected with PKP2a-H. Because COS cells express endogenous Pg, which might be able to interact with both PKP2a and Dsg1 or Dsg2 in the same complex, we attempted to determine if the association of Dsg2 with PKP2a was mediated by a limiting amount of free endogenous Pg. If this were the case, it should be possible to elevate the amount of Dsg2 associated with PKP2a by co-expression of ectopic Pg. However, the presence of ectopic Pg did not influence the level of Dsg2 co-precipitated with PKP2a (Fig. 5B).Download: Download high-res image (228KB)Download: Download full-size imageFigure 5. PKP2a co-immunoprecipitates Dsg1, Dsg2 but not Dsg3 from co-transfected COS cells, and endogenousPgand Dsg3 from singly transfected SCC9 cells.A, each of the three Dsgisoforms was transiently expressed in COS cells either alone or together with FLAG-tagged PKP2a followed by immunoprecipitation with M2-agarose and Western blot analysis of the immunocomplex and cell lysates. Dsg1 was detected with the poly-Myc antibody, Dsg2 was detected with the anti-Dsg2 antibody 6D8, and the anti-Dsg3 antibody 1880 was used to detect Dsg3. B, co-expression of Pg does not enhance the association between PKP2a and Dsg2. Dsg2, Pg, and FLAG-tagged PKP2a were transiently expressed in COS cells in combinations as indicated followed by immunoprecipitation with M2-agarose and Western blot analysis. The poly-Myc antibody was used to detect the Myc-tagged ectopic Pg. C, the HR2 domain of PKP2a is not required for its association with other desmosomal components. Different desmosomal molecules (DM) were transiently expressed in HEK293 cells either alone or together with PKP2a or PKP2aΔHR2, both of which are FLAG-tagged and were immunoprecipitated with M2-agarose. Deletion of the HR2 domain in PKP2a does not affect its co-immunoprecipitation with other desmosomal components.D, SCC9 cells were transiently transfected with either empty vector or FLAG-tagged PKP2a construct, and the Triton-soluble cell lysates were subjected to co-immunoprecipitation using M2-agarose to isolate ectopic PKP2a and its associated endogenous proteins. Pg, Dsg3 but not Dsg2 were detected in the complexes with ectopic PKP2a.The conserved HR2 domains in the head domains of PKPs have been postulated to be important for certain common functions (3, 4). However, deletion of HR2 from PKP2a did not affect its ability to co-immunoprecipitate other desmosomal components (Fig. 5C). In addition, both PKP2a ΔHR2 and PKP2a-H ΔHR2 exhibited the same distribution pattern as their respective wild-type counterparts PKP2a and PKP2a-H when expressed in SCC9 cells (data not shown). These results suggest that the HR2 domain of PKP2a is not critical for either its association with other desmosomal components or its proper localization in cells.Association of Ectopic PKP2a with Endogenous Desmosomal ComponentsTo determine whether PKP2a exhibits the same repertoire of interactions with endogenous desmosomal proteins, we analyzed endogenous desmosomal proteins that co-precipitated with FLAG-tagged PKP2a in SCC9 epithelial cells. When transiently expressed FLAG-tagged PKP2a was immunoprecipitated from the 1% Triton X-100-soluble cell lysates of SCC9 cells, endogenous Pg was consistently detected in the immunocomplex (Fig. 5D). DP, which is mostly insoluble, was variably detected in the complex with PKP2a (not shown), suggesting a weak and/or transient association. Surprisingly, whereas Dsg3 was present at low levels in the immunocomplex with ectopic PKP2a, we could not detect endogenous Dsg2 co-precipitated by ectopic PKP2a from SCC9 cells.Yeast Two-hybrid Analysis of Protein Interactions between PKP2a and Other Desmosome ComponentsTo extend the results obtained using co-immunoprecipitation assays, the ability of PKP2a to interact directly with DPNTP, PgΔN, and the desmosomal cadherin tails was tested using the yeast two-hybrid system. The relative strength of interactions between DPNTP and PKP1a or PKP2a was compared using yeast strain Y187 because it is more suitable for quantitative β-galactosidase assays. Consistent with previous reports (19), DPNTP interacted strongly with the head domain of PKP1a (Fig.6). DPNTP directly interacted with full-length PKP2a and its head domain at a much weaker level but not with the arm-repeat domain of PKP2a. PKP2a and its head domain, but not PKP2a-A, interacted directly with PgΔN at a similar level.Yeast two-hybrid assays employing growth and blue/white selection demonstrated that PKP2a directly interacted with the cytoplasmic domains of Dsg1, Dsc1a, and Dsc2a but not with Dsg2 or Dsg3 (TableI). The PKP2a head domain interacted with both Dsg1 and Dsg2 directly. However, no interactions were detected between PKP2a-A and any of the cytoplasmic domains, nor was an interaction detected between PKP2a and E-cadherin. As a positive control, the E-cadherin cytoplasmic domain interacted with p120 catenin in the same assay (data not shown).Table I. Yeast two-hybrid analysis of protein-protein interactionsEmpty CellDsg1 cytoDsg2 cytoDsg3 cytoDsc1a cytoDsc2a cytoβ-CatE-cad cytoPKP2a+−−+++−PKP2a-H++−NDNDND−PKP2a-A−−−NDNDND−AH109 yeast cells were co-transformed with PKP2a or its subdomains in pAS-CYH2 and with the cytoplasmic domains (cyto) of desmosomal cadherins in pGADT7, full-length β-catenin in pGAD424 (β-cat), or the cytoplasmic domain of E-cadherin in pGADT7 (E-cad cyto). Positive interactions were determined through analyzing the abilities of co-transformants to grow and turn blue on selection plates lacking adenine, histidine, leucine and tryptophan and containing X-α-gal. Three separate clones from each co-transformation were assessed, and the same results were obtained for all three clones in all the assays. Clones that could grow as blue colonies on selection plates were considered as positive and are designated with plus symbols, and clones that did not show growth on the selection plates were considered as negative and are designated with minus symbols. White colonies were not observed. ND, not determined.PKP1a and PKP2a Exhibit Different Localization Patterns and Abilities to Enhance the Border Recruitment of Excess DP When Overexpressed in COS CellsThe protein interaction studies described above suggest that PKP1a and PKP2a have overlapping but distinct repertoires of desmosomal binding partners and that they may contribute differently to desmosome assembly. It has been suggested that a critical function of PKP1 is its ability to enhance DP recruitment to desmosomes (19). Therefore we compared the abilities of PKP1a and PKP2a to recruit DP to cell-cell borders in transiently transfected COS cells. As reported previously (17), PKP1a localized to both the nucleus and cell borders in COS cells when it was expressed alone (Fig. 7A,a′), and its expression resulted in increased border staining for endogenous DP compared with adjacent, non-transfected cells (Fig. 7A, a, arrow). Staining for endogenous DP in the population of non-transfected cells is weak to undetectable (Fig. 7A, a and b,arrowhead). In contrast to the intense nuclear accumulation of PKP1a observed in more than 95% of transfected COS cells, less than 10% of cells transfected with PKP2a showed weak nuclear staining. Like PKP1a, PKP2a enhanced the recruitment of endogenous DP to cell borders (Fig. 7A, b and b′).Download: Download high-res image (333KB)Download: Download full-size imageFigure 7. Subcellular localization of PKP1a and PKP2a in COS cells and their abilities to enhance the cell border recruitment ofDP. A, localization of overexpressed PKP1a and PKP2a and their effects on the distribution of endogenous DP in COS cells. COS cells were transiently transfected with either FLAG-tagged PKP1a (a and a′) or FLAG-tagged PKP2a (b and b′). Double-label immunofluorescence was carried out to detect the localization of ectopic PKPs using the anti-FLAG antibody Oct-A-probe (a′ and b′) and the localization of endogenous DP using the anti-DP antibody PC28 (a and b). Both PKP1a and PKP2a are localized to cell borders, where they colocalize with and enhance the staining of endogenous DP. PKP1a is also found intensely in the nucleus (a′). The arrows (a and b) indicate enhanced border staining of endogenous DP. Thearrowheads (a and b) point to cell borders between untransfected cells. B, COS cells were co-transfected with DP together with FLAG-tagged PKP2a (a,b, a′, and b′) or FLAG-tagged PKP1a (c and c′) followed by double-label immunofluorescence using antibodies against the FLAG epitope (a′, b′, and c′) and DP (a–c). Ectopic PKP2a colocalizes extensively with overexpressed DP along intermediate filaments and cell borders (a, b, a′, and b′). Overexpression of DP alone in COS cells results in its colocalization mainly along intermediate filaments (a, inset). Ectopic PKP1a is localized predominantly to the nucleus and along cell borders, where DP is strongly recruited. The IF pattern of distribution of overexpressed DP is dramatically reduced when PKP1a is co-expressed (c and c′). Scale bars, 10 μm.Interestingly, the difference between PKP1a and PKP2a in their ability to enhance DP recruitment was revealed when both PKP and DP were co-transfected into COS cells. When expressed alone, ectopic DP predominantly colocalized with the IF network in the cytoplasm and sometimes localized to cell borders in transfected COS cells as described before (Fig. 7B, a, inset) (17). When PKP2a was co-expressed with DP, both PKP2a and DP colocalized extensively along intermediate filaments (Fig.7B, a and a′) and could also be detected along cell borders in certain cases (Fig. 7B,b and b′). In comparison, co-expression of PKP1a and DP resulted in a dramatic recruitment of DP to cell-cell borders together with PKP1a and a concomitant disappearance of DP from IF networks in co-transfected cells (Fig. 7B, c andc′). Co-expression with DP did not affect the accumulation of PKP1a in the nucleus (Fig. 7B, c′). These results showed that even though both PKPs can enhance the recruitment of endogenous DP to cell borders, PKP1a is much more efficient than PKP2a in promoting the border localization of excess DP.PKP2a Co-immunoprecipitates the Adherens Junction Component β-Catenin, Which Forms Mutually Exclusive Complexes with either E-cadherin or PKP2aIn contrast to plakoglobin, which can be found in both desmosomes and adherens junctions, β-catenin is found exclusively in adherens junctions through its direct interaction with classical cadherins such as E-cadherin. Because PKP2a interacts with the arm-repeat domain of plakoglobin, which is highly homologous to that of β-catenin, we tested whether β-catenin also binds to PKP2a. In co-immunoprecipitation experiments performed from transiently co-transfected COS cells, β-catenin specifically co-precipitated with both full-length PKP2a and its head domain but only very weakly with PKP2a-A, suggesting that the head domain of PKP2a is mainly responsible for its interaction with β-catenin (Fig.8A). Full-length PKP2a did not co-precipitate two other adherens junction components α-catenin and E-cadherin in co-transfected COS cells, showing the specificity of its association with β-catenin in this assay (data not shown). Full-length PKP2a interacted with β-catenin in yeast two-hybrid assays (Table I), suggesting that they directly bind to each other. The negative control interaction between β-catenin and protocadherin β 15 was negative (data not shown).Download: Download high-res image (243KB)Download: Download full-size imageFigure 8. PKP2a associates with β-catenin that is not bound to E-cadherin.A, the head domain of PKP2a is required for its association with β-catenin (cat). β-Catenin was transiently transfected into COS cells either alone or with different FLAG-tagged PKP2a constructs as indicated, which were then immunoprecipitated with M2-agarose. Western blots of cell lysates and immunocomplexes were performed using the polyclonal anti-β-catenin antibody C2206 and anti-FLAG antibody Oct-A-probe. PKP2a and its head domain efficiently co-immunoprecipitate β-catenin, whereas the headless fragment PKP2a-A almost completely loses this ability. B, PKP2a forms complexes with β-catenin that is not bound to E-cadherin. β-Catenin, E-cadherin, and FLAG-tagged PKP2a were co-expressed in COS cells. Specific antibodies against β-catenin (C19220) and the FLAG epitope (M2) were used to immunoprecipitate β-catenin and PKP2a, respectively. β-Catenin co-immunoprecipitates both PKP2a and E-cadherin, but E-cadherin is not detected in the immunocomplex associated with PKP2a, indicating distinct pools of β-catenin in association with either PKP2a or E-cadherin but not both of them. The upper two bands recognized by the anti-E-cadherin antibody represent the precursor and mature form, and the lower band is likely a breakdown product lacking part of the cytoplasmic β-catenin binding domain.C, SCC9 cells were transiently transfected with either empty vector or FLAG-tagged PKP2a construct and the Triton-soluble cell lysates were subjected to co-immunoprecipitation using M2-agarose to isolate ectopic PKP2a and its associated endogenous proteins. E-cadherin and β-catenin but not α-catenin were detected in the complexes with ectopic PKP2a.To determine if β-catenin forms distinct complexes with PKP2a and E-cadherin, COS cells were co-transfected with constructs expressing E-cadherin, β-catenin, and PKP2a. After immunoprecipitation of either β-catenin or PKP2a, the immunocomplex was analyzed for the presence of E-cadherin. As shown in Fig. 8B, E-cadherin efficiently associated with β-catenin when β-catenin was immunoprecipitated with an anti-β-catenin antibody; however, E-cadherin was not detected in the complex with PKP2a and β-catenin when PKP2a was immunoprecipitated by M2-agarose beads. This observation suggests that the pool of β-catenin associated with PKP2a is unable to interact with E-cadherin and that β-catenin forms mutually exclusive complexes with E-cadherin and PKP2a.To examine the complex formation between PKP2a and other adherens junction components in a more physiological environment in keratinocytes, SCC9 cells transfected with only FLAG-tagged PKP2a were used for M2-agarose immunoprecipitation experiments. Both endogenous E-cadherin and β-catenin, but not α-catenin, co-immunoprecipitated with PKP2a (Fig. 8C). The ability of ectopic PKP2a to associate with endogenous β-catenin is consistent with the protein interaction data. The presence of endogenous E-cadherin in a complex with ectopic PKP2a raises the possibility that in certain cell types, PKP2a might associate indirectly with E-cadherin through other protein partners such as Pg. Indeed, when Pg was overexpressed in COS cells with ectopic E-cadherin and PKP2a, a complex containing all three proteins could be detected (not shown), which is in contrast to the co-immunoprecipitation experiment described above for β-catenin (Fig.8B).Because endogenous PKP2a and β-catenin are localized to different junctional complexes and do not usually colocalize with each other at cell borders (Ref. 2; data not shown), we sought to determine whether overexpressed PKP2a could colocalize with endogenous β-catenin at the membrane. Both PKP2a and its head domain colocalized with endogenous β-catenin at cell borders in transiently transfected SCC9 cells (Fig.9). The expression of PKP2a or PKP2a-H did not alter the distribution of endogenous β-catenin or affect its accumulation along cell borders. These data are consistent with PKP2a having the ability to associate with β-catenin in cells.Download: Download high-res image (305KB)Download: Download full-size imageFigure 9. PKP2a and its head domain colocalize with β-catenin (cat) at the cell membrane. SCC9 cells were transiently transfected with FLAG-tagged PKP2a (a, b, and c) or its head domain PKP2a-H (d, e, and f), and double-label immunofluorescence was carried out to detect endogenous β-catenin (b and e) and FLAG-tagged ectopic proteins (a and d). Composite pictures are shown to demonstrate the colocalization of β-catenin with PKP2a and PKP2a-H along the cell borders, as indicated in yellow (cand f). Some of the overlapped signals do not appear as yellow after the overlay because the intensity of the individual signals is unequal.The Effects of PKP2a on β-Catenin/TCF SignalingFree, cytoplasmic β-catenin that is not bound to cadherins can participate in the Wnt-signaling pathway through its interaction with TCF/Lef1 transcription factors (28). PKP2a co-precipitates with a non-cadherin-bound pool of β-catenin, raising the possibility that PKP2a might be involved in regulating β-catenin/TCF signaling. To better understand the physiological consequence of the PKP2a/β-catenin interaction, we investigated the effect of PKP2a on β-catenin/TCF-regulated transcription in human colon carcinoma line SW480 cells, which have been shown to have constitutive β-catenin/TCF transcription activity (44, 46). TOPFLASH luciferase assays were performed to measure the activation of β-catenin/TCF signaling. 24 h after transfection, TOPFLASH reporter was strongly activated by endogenous β-catenin/TCF signaling in SW480 cells compared with negligible FOPFLASH activity (0.012 ± 0.002) (Fig.10). Overexpression of PKP2a significantly elevated the activation of the TOPFLASH reporter by ∼ 33% compared with vector control, and the FOPFLASH activity was not significantly affected (0.011 ± 0.001). The level of β-catenin in the cell lysates was not affected by expression of PKP2a. Double-label immunofluorescence showed that overexpressed PKP2a was largely diffuse in the cytoplasm and excluded from the nucleus, and no changes in the subcellular localization of β-catenin were detected (data not shown). E-cadherin expression dramatically reduced the TOPFLASH activity as has been reported previously (47, 48). This inhibition of β-catenin/TCF signaling by E-cadherin requires its β-catenin binding site and was shown to involve the binding and sequestering of β-catenin from the signaling pool by E-cadherin (48). Co-expression of E-cadherin with PKP2a in SW480 cells resulted in a similar level of inhibition of TOPFLASH activity as by E-cadherin alone. This inability of PKP2a to up-regulate TOPFLASH activity in the presence of E-cadherin suggests that PKP2a may exert its effect on β-catenin/TCF signaling through interaction with the same pool of signaling active β-catenin that E-cadherin sequesters.Download: Download high-res image (141KB)Download: Download full-size imageFigure 10. Effect of PKP2a on β-catenin/TCF signaling in SW480 cells. SW480 cells were transiently transfected with TOPFLASH luciferase reporter gene and a control luciferase reporter gene pRL-TK to control for transfection efficiency. The results are expressed as relative activity, which is derived from dividing the TOPFLASH luciferase activity by the activity of pRL-TK. The results are the means and S.D. of triplicate values obtained in one representative experiment of three. Negligible activity was observed using FOPFLASH reporter gene, which contains mutated TCF-binding sites (data not shown). PKP2a expression significantly elevated the TOPFLASH activity by ∼33% (p = 0.011), whereas E-cadherin expression inhibited its activity and prevented its up-regulation by PKP2a. Mean relative activities were not significantly different between cells expressing E-cadherin and cells expressing both E-cadherin and PKP2a (p = 0.405 > 0.05). Cell lysates prepared for the reporter gene assay were quantitated, and the same amount of total protein was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blot using the anti-β-catenin (cat) antibody C2206. The total level of β-catenin is not altered by the expression of either PKP2a or E-cadherin. The asterisk designates values significantly different from control by Student t test atp < 0.05.DISCUSSIONPKPs represent a family of arm-repeat proteins present in both desmosomes and the nucleus. Commonly found in stratified and complex epithelia, PKPs exhibit cell type- and differentiation-dependent patterns of desmosomal localization, suggesting distinct roles in the regulation and function of desmosomes. Their constitutive nuclear localization independent of their presence in desmosomes points to possible novel functions in the nucleus. The identification of human patients bearing PKP1 gene mutations has provided compelling evidence for its critical involvement in organizing and stabilizing desmosomes and further catalyzed the study on its role in desmosomes. However, little is known about the function of its most widely expressed relative, PKP2. In the present study, we investigated the ability of PKP2a to interact with other junctional molecules and conducted functional analyses on its role in desmosome formation and regulation of β-catenin-signaling activity.PKP1a has been shown to interact directly with DP, Dsg1, and keratin (18, 45, 49) through its head domain (18, 19). We showed here by co-immunoprecipitation from co-transfected cells that PKP2a associates with DP, Pg, Dsg1, and Dsg2. Yeast two-hybrid analysis demonstrated furthermore that interactions with DP, Pg, Dsg1, and possibly Dsg2 are direct and further uncovered Dsc1a and 2a as PKP2a interaction partners. Pg co-precipitated with PKP2a and the deletion of either the N-terminal head or C-terminal tail of Pg failed to abrogate this interaction, suggesting that it is primarily mediated by the arm-repeat domain of Pg. Intriguingly, the association between Pg and PKP2a was further enhanced by deletion of the Pg C-terminal end domain. Previous work showed that PgΔC expression in A431 cells caused formation of longer desmosomes or groups of tandemly linked desmosomes that were still attached to keratin intermediate filaments (34). It was proposed that deletion of the Pg C terminus might enhance interactions with other desmosomal components and lead to generation of longer desmosomes. Together with our data, it thus seems possible that enhanced interaction between PgΔC and PKP2a could contribute to the effect on desmosome morphology previously attributed to PgΔC expression.PKP2a co-immunoprecipitated Dsg1 and Dsg2, but not Dsg3 in co-transfected COS cells, and its interaction with Dsg1 was confirmed by yeast two-hybrid assays as being directly mediated by the PKP2a head domain. It is unclear why we detected a direct interaction between the Dsg2 cytoplasmic domain and the PKP2a head domain but not full-length PKP2a in yeast two-hybrid assays, but it seems likely that a direct binding site for Dsg2 is contained in the head domain of PKP2a in light of the abilities of both PKP2a and PKP2a-H to co-precipitate Dsg2 in transfected cells. The fact that increasing the level of cellular Pg does not enhance the association between PKP2a and Dsg2 (Fig.5B) is consistent with the hypothesis that Pg does not interact with PKP2a and Dsg2 simultaneously. The binding sites in Pg for Dsg1 and Dsc1a reside in its arm-repeat domain (40, 50, 51), as does the binding site for PKP2a as we show here. Thus, it is possible that desmosomal cadherins and PKP2a compete with each other for binding to Pg. How the observed direct interactions discussed here translate into the formation of the physiological complexes in cells may depend on other factors, including the availability of specific protein partners in specific cell types. For instance, although direct interactions with Dsg3 were not observed in co-transfection or yeast two-hybrid assays, Dsg3 was present in an endogenous complex with ectopic PKP2, whereas Dsg2 was not (Fig. 5D). Together these data suggest that Pg or other unknown proteins may mediate an indirect association between PKP2a and Dsg3 but not Dsg2. The absence of an identifiable complex between ectopic PKP2a and endogenous Dsg2 by co-immunoprecipitation may also indicate that in SCC9 cells, which express both Dsg3 and Dsg2, Dsg3 may compete more effectively for PKP2 due to its relative abundance compared with Dsg2 in the detergent-soluble pool or other factors favoring this interaction.The presence of PKP2 in desmosomes is widespread as it is found in all simple epithelia and in complex epithelia where it is localized throughout the layers and concentrated in desmosomes of the basal layer. These localization data are consistent with our observations, and together they suggest that PKP2a can associate with all Dsg isoforms, either directly or indirectly. Thus PKP2 may be involved in desmosome function on a much broader scale than PKP1, and it is intriguing to consider that it may serve different functions when it is associated with different desmosomal cadherins.In COS cells, ectopic PKP1a efficiently enhances the recruitment of DPNTP to cell borders, and this ability is conferred by the PKP1a head domain (19). Because DPNTP contains only the first 584 amino acids of DP and does not bind to IF, we compared the ability of PKP1a and PKP2a to enhance the cell border recruitment of full-length DP that is sequestered along the IF network. Co-expression of PKP1a with DP in COS cells resulted in a pattern of DP distribution vastly different from that when DP was expressed alone. Instead of exhibiting extensive co-alignment with the IF network and occasional border localization, DP was mostly concentrated along the borders, colocalizing with PKP1a. In contrast, the majority of DP remained sequestered along IF in cells co-expressing PKP2a and DP. The fact that both PKPs enhanced the border localization of endogenous DP to a similar level (Fig. 7A,a and b) could be due to a limiting amount of endogenous DP available for recruitment and that to reveal the higher capacity of PKP1a to recruit DP requires that excess DP be expressed.The different abilities of PKP1 and PKP2 to enhance cell border recruitment of ectopic DP in COS cells might be explained by several mechanisms. Biochemical evidence suggested that DP interacts with PKP2a less robustly than with PKP1a, and an interaction with a certain strength could be required to directly recruit DP to cell borders by PKPs. Secondly, the two PKPs might enhance DP recruitment indirectly through their differential ability to recruit other desmosomal components or as yet unidentified proteins. Furthermore, PKP2a could differ from PKP1a in its propensity to incorporate into desmosomes, and PKP1a may preferentially assemble into desmosomes in COS cells. Because PKP2 has been found mostly concentrated in desmosomes in the basal layer of various stratified epithelial tissues (2), perhaps the participation of PKP2 in desmosomes of the basal layer contributes to the formation of smaller (52) and possibly more dynamic desmosomes that are suitable for the amplification and generation of new cells from the basal layer. This may partly be achieved through the reduced capacity of PKP2 to recruit and stabilize other desmosomal components such as DP.Another striking difference between PKP1a and PKP2a is their ability to accumulate in the nucleus in cells overexpressing these proteins. PKP1a and its head domain efficiently concentrated in the nuclei when expressed in a variety of cell lines (17, 18, 19). Here we show that PKP2a is mostly excluded from the nucleus in transiently overexpressing cells. The PKP2a head domain can localize to the nucleus more efficiently than full-length PKP2a, indicating that the arm-repeat domain of PKP2a either contains nuclear export signals or has the ability to retain PKP2a in the cytoplasm through interactions with other proteins.Besides interacting with other desmosome plaque proteins, PKP2a is also capable of associating with β-catenin mainly through the PKP2a head domain. Co-expression of E-cadherin, β-catenin, and PKP2a led to the formation of mutually exclusive complexes that contained β-catenin with either E-cadherin or PKP2a, suggesting that PKP2a is unlikely to interact with β-catenin in the adherens junction. However, ectopic PKP2a formed complexes with endogenous E-cadherin and β-catenin but not with α-catenin in SCC9 cells. This result suggests that other proteins such as Pg could mediate the association between E-cadherin and PKP2a. Because this complex lacks α-catenin, it is unlikely to be found in mature adherens junctions, but it perhaps represents a junction intermediate involved in sorting and segregation of components during the early stages of junction formation or during the dynamic regulation of junctional structures. Even though we were unable to detect colocalization of endogenous PKP2a and β-catenin in SCC9 cells, we did observe extensive colocalization of ectopic PKP2a and its head domain with endogenous β-catenin along the cell borders. It has been shown previously that there is a pool of β-catenin localized in the lateral membrane of Madin-Darby canine kidney cells that does not contain E-cadherin (53), so possibly ectopic PKP2a could interact with this pool of β-catenin at the membrane but not the E-cadherin bound pool of β-catenin.Despite a lack of apparent effect on the total level of β-catenin, PKP2a overexpression resulted in a modest, but reproducible increase in the level of endogenous β-catenin/TCF signaling in SW480 cells. Because we could only achieve about 15% transfection efficiency in SW480 cells, some moderate effect on β-catenin protein level by expression of PKP2a may not have been detectable in the total cell population. PKP2a expression did not seem to change the subcellular localization of β-catenin in transfected cells, and experiments using COS cells and HEK293 cells, which could be transfected at efficiencies greater than 50%, did not reveal any significant effect by PKP2a expression on either the total level of β-catenin or its partitioning into different detergent soluble pools (data not shown). These results suggest that PKP2a modulates β-catenin signaling through mechanisms other than regulating its stability, as have been suggested for several regulators of β-catenin/TCF signaling (54, 55, 56). Expression of ectopic E-cadherin inhibited endogenous β-catenin/TCF signaling and suppressed PKP2a-dependent increases in β-catenin/TCF signaling in SW480 cells. A recent paper presented evidence for the existence of a small pool of transcriptionally active β-catenin among the much larger pool of cytosolic but transcriptionally inactive β-catenin in SW480 cells (47). Our result is consistent with the model in which E-cadherin sequesters the transcriptionally active pool of β-catenin and prevents its binding to PKP2a.The data presented in this study show that PKP2 and PKP1 exhibit overlapping but distinct properties in their repertoires of binding partners and functional relationships with DP. These results, coupled with the observed partially overlapping yet different expression profiles, suggest specific participation of individual or combinations of PKPs in creating functionally distinguishable desmosomes that are tailored for the needs of different tissues or differentiation stages. The ability to interact with β-catenin and modulate its signaling activity indicates that PKP2a might be involved in other cellular processes such as the cross-talk between desmosomes and adherens junctions and the transduction of signals from the cell surface to the nucleus.AcknowledgmentsWe thank all those who have generously contributed antibodies, plasmids, and other reagents, including M. Amagai, P. Cowin, R. Marsh, R. Brackenbury, J. Stanley, P. McCrea, P. Polakis, J. Nelson, and B. Vogelstein. Thanks also to Yejia Zhang for assistance in the initial cloning of PKP2, Claudia Horn for technical assistance in the cloning of yeast two-hybrid constructs containing the cytoplasmic domains of desmosomal cadherins, and Spiro Getsios, Lisa Godsel, and Andrew Kowalczyk for helpful discussion and critical reading of the manuscript.Recommended articlesREFERENCES1M. Hatzfeld, G.I. Kristjansson, U. Plessmann, K. WeberJ. Cell Sci., 107 (1994), pp. 2259-2270CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar2C. Mertens, C. Kuhn, W.W. FrankeJ. Cell Biol., 135 (1996), pp. 1009-1025View in ScopusGoogle Scholar3S. Bonne, J. van Hengel, F. Nollet, P. Kools, F. van RoyJ. Cell Sci., 112 (1999), pp. 2265-2276CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar4A. Schmidt, L. Langbein, S. Pratzel, M. Rode, H.R. Rackwitz, W.W. FrankeDifferentiation, 64 (1999), pp. 291-306View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar5A. Schmidt, L. Langbein, M. Rode, S. Pratzel, R. Zimbelmann, W.W. FrankeCell Tissue Res., 290 (1997), pp. 481-499View in ScopusGoogle Scholar6I. Moll, H. Kurzen, L. Langbein, W.W. FrankeJ. Invest. Dermatol., 108 (1997), pp. 139-146View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar7P. Cowin, B. BurkeCurr. Opin. Cell Biol., 8 (1996), pp. 56-65View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar8D. Garrod, M. Chidgey, A. NorthCurr. Opin. Cell Biol., 8 (1996), pp. 670-678View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar9A.P. Kowalczyk, E.A. Bornslaeger, S.M. Norvell, H.L. Palka, K.J. GreenInt. Rev. Cytol., 185 (1999), pp. 237-302Google Scholar10K.J. Green, C.A. GaudryNat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol., 1 (2000), pp. 208-216View in ScopusGoogle Scholar11R.S. Buxton, P. Cowin, W.W. Franke, D.R. Garrod, K.J. Green, I.A. King, P.J. Koch, A.I. Magee, D.A. Rees, J.R. StanleyJ. Cell Biol., 121 (1993), pp. 481-483View in ScopusGoogle Scholar12P.J. Koch, W.W. FrankeCurr. Opin. Cell Biol., 6 (1994), pp. 682-687View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar13P. Ruiz, V. Brinkmann, B. Ledermann, M. Behrend, C. Grund, C. Thalhammer, F. Vogel, C. Birchmeier, U. Gunthert, W.W. Franke, W. BirchmeierJ. Cell Biol., 135 (1996), pp. 215-225View in ScopusGoogle Scholar14C. Bierkamp, K.J. McLaughlin, H. Schwarz, O. Huber, R. KemlerDev. Biol., 180 (1996), pp. 780-785View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar15G. McKoy, N. Protonotarios, A. Crosby, A. Tsatsopoulou, A. Anastasakis, A. Coonar, M. Norman, C. Baboonian, S. Jeffery, W.J. McKennaLancet, 355 (2000), pp. 2119-2124View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar16J.A. McGrath, J.R. McMillan, C.S. Shemanko, S.K. Runswick, I.M. Leigh, E.B. Lane, D.R. Garrod, R.A. EadyNat. Genet., 17 (1997), pp. 240-244Google Scholar17E.A. Bornslaeger, L.M. Godsel, C.M. Corcoran, J.K. Park, M. Hatzfeld, A.P. Kowalczyk, K.J. GreenJ. Cell Sci., 114 (2001), pp. 727-738CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar18M. Hatzfeld, C. Haffner, K. Schulze, U. VinzensJ. Cell Biol., 149 (2000), pp. 209-222View in ScopusGoogle Scholar19A.P. Kowalczyk, M. Hatzfeld, E.A. Bornslaeger, D.S. Kopp, J.E. Borgwardt, C.M. Corcoran, A. Settler, K.J. GreenJ. Biol. Chem., 274 (1999), pp. 18145-18148View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar20I. Simcha, M. Shtutman, D. Salomon, J. Zhurinsky, E. Sadot, B. Geiger, A. Ben-Ze'evJ. Cell Biol., 141 (1998), pp. 1433-1448View in ScopusGoogle Scholar21J. van Hengel, P. Vanhoenacker, K. Staes, F. van RoyProc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 96 (1999), pp. 7980-7985View in ScopusGoogle Scholar22E. Charpentier, R.M. Lavker, E. Acquista, P. CowinJ. Cell Biol., 149 (2000), pp. 503-520Google Scholar23F.T. Kolligs, B. Kolligs, K.M. Hajra, G. Hu, M. Tani, K.R. Cho, E.R. FearonGenes Dev., 14 (2000), pp. 1319-1331CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar24S. Hakimelahi, H.R. Parker, A.J. Gilchrist, M. Barry, Z. Li, R.C. Bleackley, M. PasdarJ. Biol. Chem., 275 (2000), pp. 10905-10911View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar25N.K. Noren, B.P. Liu, K. Burridge, B. KreftJ. Cell Biol., 150 (2000), pp. 567-580Google Scholar26P.Z. Anastasiadis, S.Y. Moon, M.A. Thoreson, D.J. Mariner, H.C. Crawford, Y. Zheng, A.B. ReynoldsNat. Cell Biol., 2 (2000), pp. 637-644View in ScopusGoogle Scholar27T.S. Jou, D.B. Stewart, J. Stappert, W.J. Nelson, J.A. MarrsProc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 92 (1995), pp. 5067-5071CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar28K. Willert, R. NusseCurr. Opin. Genet. Dev., 8 (1998), pp. 95-102View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar29A. Wodarz, R. NusseAnnu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol., 14 (1998), pp. 59-88CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar30H. Dierick, A. BejsovecCurr. Top. Dev. Biol., 43 (1999), pp. 153-190Google Scholar31J. Zhurinsky, M. Shtutman, A. Ben-Ze'evJ. Cell Sci., 113 (2000), pp. 3127-3139CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar32C. Mertens, I. Hofmann, Z. Wang, M. Teichmann, S.S. Chong, M. Schnolzer, W.W. FrankeProc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 98 (2001), pp. 7795-7800View in ScopusGoogle Scholar33A.P. Kowalczyk, H.L. Palka, H.H. Luu, L.A. Nilles, J.E. Anderson, M.J. Wheelock, K.J. GreenJ. Biol. Chem., 269 (1994), pp. 31214-31223View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar34H.L. Palka, K.J. GreenJ. Cell Sci., 110 (1997), pp. 2359-2371CrossrefGoogle Scholar35E.A. Bornslaeger, C.M. Corcoran, T.S. Stappenbeck, K.J. GreenJ. Cell Biol., 134 (1996), pp. 985-1001View in ScopusGoogle Scholar36K. Ishii, S.M. Norvell, L.J. Bannon, E.V. Amargo, L.T. Pascoe, K.J. GreenJ. Invest. Dermatol., 117 (2001), pp. 26-35View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar37T.S. Stappenbeck, K.J. GreenJ. Cell Biol., 116 (1992), pp. 1197-1209View in ScopusGoogle Scholar38B.D. Angst, L.A. Nilles, K.J. GreenJ. Cell Sci., 97 (1990), pp. 247-257CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar39C.A. Gaudry, H.L. Palka, R.L. Dusek, A.C. Huen, M.J. Khandekar, L.G. Hudson, K.J. GreenJ. Biol. Chem., 276 (2001), pp. 24871-24880View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar40J.K. Wahl, P.A. Sacco, T.M. McGranahan-Sadler, L.M. Sauppe, M.J. Wheelock, K.R. JohnsonJ. Cell Sci., 109 (1996), pp. 1143-1154CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar41S.M. Norvell, K.J. GreenJ. Cell Sci., 111 (1998), pp. 1305-1318CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar42A.P. Kowalczyk, E.A. Bornslaeger, J.E. Borgwardt, H.L. Palka, A.S. Dhaliwal, C.M. Corcoran, M.F. Denning, K.J. GreenJ. Cell Biol., 139 (1997), pp. 773-784View in ScopusGoogle Scholar43A.P. Kowalczyk, P. Navarro, E. Dejana, E.A. Bornslaeger, K.J. Green, D.S. Kopp, J.E. BorgwardtJ. Cell Sci., 111 (1998), pp. 3045-3057View in ScopusGoogle Scholar44V. Korinek, N. Barker, P.J. Morin, D. van Wichen, R. de Weger, K.W. Kinzler, B. Vogelstein, H. CleversScience, 275 (1997), pp. 1784-1787View in ScopusGoogle Scholar45E.A. Smith, E. FuchsJ. Cell Biol., 141 (1998), pp. 1229-1241View in ScopusGoogle Scholar46P.J. Morin, A.B. Sparks, V. Korinek, N. Barker, H. Clevers, B. Vogelstein, K.W. KinzlerScience, 275 (1997), pp. 1787-1790View in ScopusGoogle Scholar47C.J. Gottardi, E. Wong, B.M. GumbinerJ. Cell Biol., 153 (2001), pp. 1049-1060Google Scholar48S. Orsulic, O. Huber, H. Aberle, S. Arnold, R. KemlerJ. Cell Sci., 112 (1999), pp. 1237-1245CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar49I. Hofmann, C. Mertens, M. Brettel, V. Nimmrich, M. Schnolzer, H. HerrmannJ. Cell Sci., 113 (2000), pp. 2471-2483CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar50L.L. Witcher, R. Collins, S. Puttagunta, S.E. Mechanic, M. Munson, B. Gumbiner, P. CowinJ. Biol. Chem., 271 (1996), pp. 10904-10909View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar51N.A. Chitaev, R.E. Leube, R.B. Troyanovsky, L.G. Eshkind, W.W. Franke, S.M. TroyanovskyJ. Cell Biol., 133 (1996), pp. 359-369View in ScopusGoogle Scholar52F.H. White, K. GohariJ. Cell Sci., 66 (1984), pp. 411-429CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar53I.S. Nathke, L. Hinck, J.R. Swedlow, J. Papkoff, W.J. NelsonJ. Cell Biol., 125 (1994), pp. 1341-1352View in ScopusGoogle Scholar54C.S. Young, M. Kitamura, S. Hardy, J. KitajewskiMol. Cell. Biol., 18 (1998), pp. 2474-2485View in ScopusGoogle Scholar55R.W. Nelson, B.M. GumbinerJ. Cell Biol., 147 (1999), pp. 367-374View in ScopusGoogle Scholar56K.A. Guger, B.M. GumbinerDev. Biol., 223 (2000), pp. 441-448View PDFView articleView in ScopusGoogle ScholarCited by (188)Desmosome structure, composition and function2008, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta - BiomembranesShow abstractDesmosomes are intercellular junctions of epithelia and cardiac muscle. They resist mechanical stress because they adopt a strongly adhesive state in which they are said to be hyper-adhesive and which distinguishes them from other intercellular junctions; desmosomes are specialised for strong adhesion and their failure can result in diseases of the skin and heart. They are also dynamic structures whose adhesiveness can switch between high and low affinity adhesive states during processes such as embryonic development and wound healing, the switching being signalled by protein kinase C. Desmosomes may also act as signalling centres, regulating the availability of signalling molecules and thereby participating in fundamental processes such as cell proliferation, differentiation and morphogenesis. Here we consider the structure, composition and function of desmosomes, and their role in embryonic development and disease.Desmosomes: New perspectives on a classic2007, Journal of Investigative DermatologyCitation Excerpt :This idea is supported by one study in which a stabilized form of PG (ΔN122-PG) led to the formation of additional hair germs and hyperplastic hair follicles (Teuliere et al., 2004), similar to those seen in mice with elevated β-catenin (Gat et al., 1998); however, this effect is seen only in a β-catenin wild-type, not null, background. The notion that altering desmosome function could impact on β-catenin signaling is supported by the observed ability of the β-catenin binding partner PKP2 to modulate β-catenin-dependent TOP-FLASH reporter activity in vitro (Chen et al., 2002); in addition, forced suprabasal expression of Dsc3 enhanced β-catenin signaling activity and altered epidermal differentiation in transgenic mice (Hardman et al., 2005). On the other hand, recent reports have demonstrated PG's ability to signal in a β-catenin-deficient background, providing support for β-catenin-independent functions in signaling (Maeda et al., 2004; Teuliere et al., 2004; Williamson et al., 2006).Show abstractDesmosomes are highly specialized anchoring junctions that link intermediate filaments to sites of intercellular adhesion, thus facilitating the formation of a supracellular scaffolding that distributes mechanical forces throughout a tissue. These junctions are thus particularly important for maintaining the integrity of tissues that endure physical stress, such as the epidermis and myocardium. The importance of the classic mechanical functions of desmosomal constituents is underscored by pathologies reported in animal models and an ever-expanding list of human mutations that target both desmosomal cadherins and their associated cytoskeletal anchoring proteins. However, the notion that desmosomes are static structures that exist simply to glue cells together belies their susceptibility to remodeling in response to environmental cues and their important tissue-specific roles in cell behavior and signaling. Here, we review the molecular blueprint of the desmosome and models for assembling its protein components to form an adhesive interface and the desmosomal plaque. We also discuss emerging evidence of supra-adhesive roles for desmosomal proteins in regulating tissue morphogenesis and homeostasis. Finally, we highlight the dynamic nature of these adhesive organelles, examining mechanisms in health and disease for modulating adhesive strength and stability of desmosomes.Remodelling of gap junctions and connexin expression in diseased myocardium2008, Cardiovascular ResearchHomozygous deletions and chromosome amplifications in human lung carcinomas revealed by single nucleotide polymorphism array analysis2005, Cancer ResearchMutations in the desmosomal protein plakophilin-2 are common in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy2004, Nature GeneticsWorking out the strength and flexibility of desmosomes2004, Nature Reviews Molecular Cell BiologyView all citing articles on ScopusPublished, JBC Papers in Press, January 14, 2002, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M108765200*This work is supported by a R. H. Lurie Baseball Charities Cancer Fellowship (to X. C.), an Institute for the Promotion of Innovation by Science and Technology-Flanders Fellowship (to S. B), Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Grant Hal791/3-4 (to M. H.), a Fund for Scientific Research-Flanders grant (to F. v.-R.), and National Institutes of Health Grants RO1 AR43380, PO1 DE12328 (project 4), and AR41836 (to K. G.).The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.© 2002 ASBMB. Currently published by Elsevier Inc; originally published by American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.Recommended articlesMunc18b Increases Insulin Granule Fusion, Restoring Deficient Insulin Secretion in Type-2 Diabetes Human and Goto-Kakizaki Rat Islets with Improvement in Glucose HomeostasisEBioMedicine, Volume 16, 2017, pp. 262-274TairanQin, …, Herbert Y.GaisanoView PDFRegulation of keratin network organizationCurrent Opinion in Cell Biology, Volume 32, 2015, pp. 56-64FannyLoschke, …, Thomas MMaginView PDFSkin KeratinsMethods in Enzymology, Volume 568, 2016, pp. 303-350FengrongWang, …, Pierre A.CoulombeView PDFMolecular analysis of sarcomeric and non-sarcomeric genes in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathyGene, Volume 577, Issue 2, 2016, pp. 227-235IreneBottillo, …, PaolaGrammaticoView PDFIdentification of striatin, a desmosomal protein, in the canine corneal epitheliumResearch in Veterinary Science, Volume 102, 2015, pp. 182-183Joshua A.Stern, …, Kathryn M.MeursCellular HIV-1 inhibition by truncated old world primate APOBEC3A proteins lacking a complete deaminase domainVirology, Volumes 468–470, 2014, pp. 532-544MikiKatuwal, …, Edward B.StephensView PDFShow 3 more articlesArticle MetricsCitationsCitation Indexes: 188CapturesReaders: 99MentionsReferences: 13View detailsAbout ScienceDirectRemote accessShopping cartAdvertiseContact and supportTerms and conditionsPrivacy policyCookies are used by this site. Cookie SettingsAll content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.Cookie Preference CenterWe use cookies which are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyse, improve and personalise our content and your digital experience. For more information, see our Cookie Policy and the list of Google Ad-Tech Vendors.

You may choose not to allow some types of cookies. However, blocking some types may impact your experience of our site and the services we are able to offer. See the different category headings below to find out more or change your settings.
Allow all Manage Consent PreferencesStrictly Necessary CookiesAlways activeThese cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.
Cookie Details List‎Functional CookiesFunctional CookiesThese cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.Cookie Details List‎Performance CookiesPerformance CookiesThese cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site.Cookie Details List‎Targeting CookiesTargeting CookiesThese cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.Cookie Details List‎Back ButtonCookie ListSearch IconFilter IconClearcheckbox labellabelApplyCancelConsentLeg.Interestcheckbox labellabelcheckbox labellabelcheckbox labellabelConfirm my choices------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

paper-title: The three-dimensional molecular structure of the desmosomal plaque _ PNAS 
ARTICLESCurrent IssueLatest ArticlesSpecial FeaturesList of IssuesPNAS NexusFront MatterAUTHORSInformation for AuthorsEditorial and Journal PoliciesSubmission ProceduresPublication ChargesTopics
    Physical SciencesSocial SciencesBiological SciencesFeatured TopicsPhysicsChemistrySustainability ScienceArticles By TopicApplied MathematicsApplied Physical SciencesAstronomyBiophysics and Computational BiologyComputer SciencesEarth, Atmospheric, and Planetary SciencesEngineeringEnvironmental SciencesMathematicsStatisticsFeatured TopicsAnthropologySustainability ScienceArticles By TopicDemographyEconomic SciencesEnvironmental SciencesPolitical SciencesPsychological and Cognitive SciencesSocial SciencesFeatured TopicAnthropologySustainability ScienceArticles By TopicAgricultural SciencesApplied Biological SciencesBiochemistryBiophysics and Computational BiologyCell BiologyDevelopmental BiologyEcologyEnvironmental SciencesEvolutionGeneticsImmunology and InflammationMedical SciencesMicrobiologyNeurosciencePharmacologyPhysiologyPlant BiologyPopulation BiologyPsychological and Cognitive SciencesSystems Biology0CartSign in
                Register
            
            Individual Login
        
            Institutional Login
        SubmitQuick Search anywhereEnter journal, DOI, article type, keywords, authors, etc.Quick search in CitationsJournal*Journal*PNAS NexusProceedings of the National Academy of SciencesYearVolume*Issue*Page/eLocation ID**Required fieldQuick Search in JournalsEnter journal, DOI, article type, keywords, authors, etc.Quick Search in JournalsEnter journal, DOI, article type, keywords, authors, etc.Searching:AnywhereAnywhereCitationPNAS NexusProceedings of the National Academy of SciencesAdvanced SearchSearchSUGGESTED SEARCHES: Covid-19Artificial IntelligenceMpoxClimate ChangeGun ViolenceSign in
                Register
            
            Individual Login
        
            Institutional Login
        Quick Search anywhereEnter journal, DOI, article type, keywords, authors, etc.ARTICLESCurrent IssueLatest ArticlesSpecial FeaturesList of IssuesPNAS NexusFront MatterAUTHORSInformation for AuthorsEditorial and Journal PoliciesSubmission ProceduresPublication ChargesTopics ContactSite MapTerms & Privacy PolicyAccessibilitybackPhysical SciencesFeatured TopicsPhysicsChemistrySustainability ScienceArticles By TopicApplied MathematicsApplied Physical SciencesAstronomyBiophysics and Computational BiologyComputer SciencesEarth, Atmospheric, and Planetary SciencesEngineeringEnvironmental SciencesMathematicsStatisticsbackSocial SciencesFeatured TopicsAnthropologySustainability ScienceArticles By TopicDemographyEconomic SciencesEnvironmental SciencesPolitical SciencesPsychological and Cognitive SciencesSocial SciencesbackBiological SciencesFeatured TopicAnthropologySustainability ScienceArticles By TopicAgricultural SciencesApplied Biological SciencesBiochemistryBiophysics and Computational BiologyCell BiologyDevelopmental BiologyEcologyEnvironmental SciencesEvolutionGeneticsImmunology and InflammationMedical SciencesMicrobiologyNeurosciencePharmacologyPhysiologyPlant BiologyPopulation BiologyPsychological and Cognitive SciencesSystems BiologybackTopics  
                    Physical Sciences 
                      
                    Social Sciences 
                      
                    Biological Sciences 
                    Research ArticleBiological SciencesOpen accessShare onThe three-dimensional molecular structure of the desmosomal plaqueAshrafAl-Amoudi, DanielCastaño-Diez, Damien P.Devos, +2, Robert B.Russell, Graham T.Johnson, and Achilleas S.Frangakisachilleas.frangakis@biophysik.org-2Authors Info & AffiliationsEdited by Barry H. Honig, Columbia University/Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY, and approved March 10, 2011 (received for review December 27, 2010)April 4, 2011108 (16) 6480-6485https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.10194691085,09561MetricsTotal Views5,095Last 12 Months395Total Citations61Last 12 Months0View all metricsTrack CitationsAdd to Reading ListPDF/EPUBContentsVol. 108 | No. 16AbstractResults and DiscussionConclusionsMaterials and MethodsData AvailabilityAcknowledgmentsSupporting InformationReferencesInformation & AuthorsMetrics & CitationsView OptionsReferencesMediaShareAbstractThe cytoplasmic surface of intercellular junctions is a complex network of molecular interactions that link the extracellular region of the desmosomal cadherins with the cytoskeletal intermediate filaments. Although 3D structures of the major plaque components are known, the overall architecture remains unknown. We used cryoelectron tomography of vitreous sections from human epidermis to record 3D images of desmosomes in vivo and in situ at molecular resolution. Our results show that the architecture of the cytoplasmic surface of the desmosome is a 2D interconnected quasiperiodic lattice, with a similar spatial organization to the extracellular side. Subtomogram averaging of the plaque region reveals two distinct layers of the desmosomal plaque: a low-density layer closer to the membrane and a high-density layer further away from the membrane. When combined with a heuristic, allowing simultaneous constrained fitting of the high-resolution structures of the major plaque proteins (desmoplakin, plakophilin, and plakoglobin), it reveals their mutual molecular interactions and explains their stoichiometry. The arrangement suggests that alternate plakoglobin–desmoplakin complexes create a template on which desmosomal cadherins cluster before they stabilize extracellularly by binding at their N-terminal tips. Plakophilins are added as a molecular reinforcement to fill the gap between the formed plaque complexes and the plasma membrane.Sign up for PNAS alerts.Get alerts for new articles, or get an alert when an article is cited.Manage alertsCell junctions are widely distributed in animal tissues and are most abundant in tissues that are subjected to considerable mechanical stress, such as heart, epidermis, and muscle. These junctions are composed of two main classes of proteins: transmembrane adhesion proteins with an extracellular domain that interacts with either the ECM (e.g., focal adhesion and hemidesmosome) or the extracellular domains of specific transmembrane adhesion proteins from the juxtaposed cell (e.g., adherens junctions and desmosomes); and a cytoplasmic tail that binds to one or more intracellular anchor proteins. These form a distinct plaque on the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane and connect the junctional complexes to actin filaments or intermediate filaments (IFs). When they have been assembled, these junctions play essential roles in tissue morphogenesis and maintenance; plaque disruption is a hallmark of many blistering and cancer diseases (1, 2). Biochemical and mutagenesis studies have revealed many interactions between the plaque components and their connections to the extracellular space (3–8). However, the organization and interactions of the constituent proteins in the context of the assembled junctions remain poorly understood. For example, whether or how actin filaments bind in situ to the adherens junctions and how the anchoring proteins in hemidesmosome plaque connect integrin to the IFs is still unclear.In the current study, we present the 3D cytoplasmic surface of the desmosome—the desmosomal plaque—from human epidermis. The desmosomal plaque consists of two electron-dense regions: the outer dense plaque (ODP) is located closer to the plasma membrane, and the inner dense plaque (IDP) is further away from the membrane. The ODP consists of two major armadillo family members, plakoglobin and plakophilin, which mediate the binding of cadherin cytoplasmic tails to the N terminus of desmoplakin, which itself constitutes most of the IDP and tethers to the IFs (1, 2). Despite many efforts, the molecular architecture of the desmosomal plaque components remains unknown because of its large size and complex composition. The challenge is both technical and functional: first, although most of our phenotypic knowledge of the desmosome morphology has been derived from EM studies of thin sections, the use of heavy-metal staining has resulted in the plaque appearing extremely electron-dense without significant distinguishable features (9–11). Hence, the arrangement of the macromolecules could not be resolved. Second, the molecular organization and the stoichiometry of the plaque in situ, which is essential for maintaining and regulating the adhesion of desmosomal cadherins in the extracellular domain and the cytoplasmic interaction with IFs, remain unknown.Here we use cryoelectron tomography (cryo-ET) of vitreous sections from human desmosomes to visualize the molecular architecture of the plaque. Vitreous cryosectioning has been the “gold standard” of EM preparation methods, which—in contrast to conventional EM preparation methods—does not involve any heavy-metal staining, and does not cause any aggregation. Hence, it provides high-resolution images of ultrastructure at as close to native conditions as possible. However, vitreous cryosectioning in combination with cryo-ET is challenging, mainly because of cutting-induced deformations. Cryosections are usually not flat and have a number of cutting artifacts, including knife marks, crevasses, and cutting-induced compression (12). Most of these problems have been circumvented. Knife marks do not influence the subsequent image processing, and crevasses can be prevented at favorable cutting settings (13). The cutting-induced compression is an inhomogeneous volumetric deformation and thus cannot be corrected in the tomographic reconstructions. A recent report has shown that compression has an effect mainly at cellular level and has no effect on macromolecular complexes such as ribosomes (14). In addition to these problems, sections are usually not flat and thus are poorly attached to the support film. This is has been resolved adequately with the application of electrostatic charging (15). In combination with 3D subtomogram averaging, cryo-ET of vitreous sections is therefore currently the only way to quantitatively analyze electron tomographic data from eukaryotic cells at arbitrary regions and produce molecular 3D EM density maps. It thus has the potential for analyzing the whole genre of these intercellular junctions. The 3D average map of desmosomes showed a periodic arrangement of the plaque, which closely resembles the molecular organization of the desmosomal cadherins in the extracellular space previously revealed by cryo-ET of vitreous sections (16). We show that the plaque consists of two distinct electron-dense regions separated by an electron-lucent region: a low-density region closer to the membrane and a high-density region further away from the membrane. Fitting of the available X-ray structures of the plaque components into the EM density map by integrating information from immuno-EM data, biochemical methods, and mutagenesis methods leads us to propose a likely configuration of the interacting molecules within the plaque.Results and DiscussionCryo-ET Reveals Two Distinct Layers.We first analyzed the general phenotype of the desmosomal region in 2D projection images of vitreous sections from human skin (Fig. 1A) and computational slices from the 3D reconstruction (Fig. 1B). The extracellular domains of the desmosomal cadherins appear as electron-dense, curved protrusions extending from the plasma membrane to the dense midline. The ODP is characterized by two distinct dense regions: an approximately 4 nm thick region located approximately 10 nm from the plasma membrane and an approximately 8 nm thick electron-dense region located approximately 20 nm from the plasma membrane (Fig. 1C). The locations of these regions overlap with the peaks of the distribution of the gold labels in the immuno-EM studies on desmosomes and correspond to the positions of the N- and C-termini of the plakophilin and plakoglobin, respectively (11). The immuno-EM studies also show that, in addition to plakophilin and plakoglobin, the ODP contains the cytoplasmic domains of the desmosomal cadherins and the N-terminal region of desmoplakin. For simplicity, we refer to the approximately 8 nm thick layer as the “plakoglobin layer” and the approximately 4 nm thick layer as the “plakophilin layer.” The higher number of proteins in the plakoglobin layer is evident from its higher density (i.e., low intensity) compared with the plakophilin layer (Fig. 1C). Furthermore, the plakoglobin layer has the same density as the dense midline. Because the intensity of the recorded images is linearly dependent on the density of the protein complexes, we can closely estimate the stoichiometries of the constituent components. Hence, given the size of the first extracellular domain (EC1) of the cadherins involved in the interaction at the dense midline, and the sizes of plakophilin, desmoplakin, and plakoglobin, we conclude that the plakoglobin layer contains the same amount of protein complexes as the dense midline. The plakophilin layer contains half the number of complexes compared with the dense midline, and therefore the same number of complexes as the number of cadherins emanating from the cell surface.Fig. 1.Ultrastructure of the desmosome from human epidermis. (A) Two-dimensional projection image of a straight desmosome shows the periodic structure in extracellular and intracellular regions. The extracellular desmosomal cadherins appear as electron-dense protrusions extending from the plasma membrane (PM) to a dense midline (DM), showing a pronounced periodicity (purple boxed area). At the intracellular region (IC), two layers with different levels of intensity (green and blue highlighted area) can be observed, corresponding to the plakophilin and plakoglobin layers. (B) A 6-nm-thick tomographic slice shows details of the desmosomal interactions in extracellular and intracellular spaces. cis interactions (cadherin emanating from the same cell) are highlighted by the orange arrows; trans interactions (cadherins emanating from juxtaposed cells), with the characteristic “W” shape, are boxed in the orange areas. The density profile of C is indicated on the image. (C) Graph of relative density as projected orthogonally to the normal of the plasma membrane (in three different colors corresponding to the different regions of the desmosome). The plasma membranes have the highest density, followed by the plakoglobin (PG) layer with a similar density to the dense midline, and finally the plakophilin (PP) layer with the lowest density. The comparable densities between the plakoglobin layer and the dense midline indicate a similar number of proteins clustering at these regions. (D) Superimposed autocorrelation function calculated at various positions of the desmosomal plaque (indicated with blue box in B) shows that the plaque has a periodicity of approximately 7 nm, which matches that of the extracellular region. (Scale bars: A and B, 40 nm.)Open in viewerThe plakoglobin and plakophilin layers indicate a quasi-periodicity of approximately 7 nm, as seen in the autocorrelation function, which can be followed over several molecules and is very similar to the quasiperiodicity of the extracellular region (Fig. 1D). We focused our analysis on the ODP regions because, when we processed the IDP, we could not obtain any significant densities or periodic patterns. We recorded several tomograms at different defocus settings ranging from −4 to −8 μm. The resulting 3D reconstructions were consistent with each other and showed similar periodicity, which enabled us to independently confirm the molecular architecture (Fig. S1 and Table S1).Desmosomal Plaque Is an Ordered Array.To improve the signal, we rotationally aligned subtomograms (which were selected around the highest density positions of the plakophilin layer) according to their autocorrelation properties, with subsequent translational alignment (16). To analyze the structure of the plaque, we generated a number of individual subtomograms from several desmosomal regions. After subtomogram averaging and classification, the resulting map had a resolution of approximately 3.2 nm (according to the 0.5 criterion of the Fourier shell correlation; Fig. S2). The densities in the plakophilin layer are approximately 4 nm long and approximately 3 nm thick and produce a quasi-2D crystal layer arranged parallel to the plasma membrane. Their dimensions fit well to the structure of the arm repeats of the plakophilin (17). The unit cell has a parallelogram arrangement with side lengths of 7.5 nm and 6.8 nm and an angle of approximately 80° (Fig. S3), which is similar to the cadherin arrangement of the extracellular space (16). The area between plakophilin and plakoglobin appears smooth, indicating flexible regions that have been smoothed out after subtomogram averaging. In contrast to the N-terminal of plakoglobin, the N-terminal domain of plakophilin, consisting of 250 aa, is predicted to be largely unstructured and is likely to span this area. Furthermore, the plakophilins are shifted compared with the plakoglobin layer, and are accessible from the cytoplasmic side without interference from complexes within the plakoglobin layer. The plakophilins do not have obvious contacts with the membrane or with the densities observed in the plakoglobin layer. Although it is not visible, this does not exclude interactions between the two layers, as it is well known from many in vitro studies that N-terminal domain of plakophilin interacts mainly with N-terminal desmoplakin and cytoplasmic domains of desmosomal cadherins.The densities in the plakoglobin layer form a stacked repeating zigzag pattern (Fig. 2C), with the molecules tilted with respect to the plasma membrane. At favorable views, the shape of the plakoglobins can be recognized (Fig. 2D). A number of studies using freeze-fracture and EM of chemically fixed and stained samples reported 5- to 8-nm-wide “traversing filaments” perpendicular to the plasma membrane and suggested that these filaments are associated with the IFs spanning the whole plaque and even penetrate the plasma membrane and interact with the extracellular domains in both desmosomes and hemidesmosomes (18–20). Because of the limited resolution of our map, the densities corresponding to the arm repeats of plakophilin and plakoglobin, the desmoplakin N terminus and the cytoplasmic domains of desmosomal cadherins cannot be individually distinguished. However, the complex structure built from these components is clearly visible.Fig. 2.Three-dimensional average of desmosomal plaque. (A) Illustration shows isosurface of the 3D average (350 subtomograms) of the intracellular part of the desmosome and the computational sections along the three axes visualized in B–E. (B) Coronal slice (0.6 nm thick) through the subtomogram average (as indicated by the letters in the illustration) show that the molecules in the plakoglobin layer form a zigzag pattern. The plakoglobin layer does not have obvious connections to the plakophilin layer. The area between the two regions appears smooth, electron-lucent, and unstructured. (C) Sagittal slice (0.6 nm thick) through the subtomogram average. The cross-sections of two molecules are shown, showing a remarkable similarity to the cross-sections of plakoglobin molecules. (D and E) Two 0.6-nm-thick axial slices through the plakophilin and the plakoglobin layers, respectively (E and F). A clear periodicity can be observed in both layers. Superposition of the two layers shows that the molecules in the plakophilin layer are shifted with respect to the plakoglobin layer, and are hence accessible from the cytoplasmic side. (E) Interconnections between the various molecules are visible. (Scale bars: 7 nm.) (B) The isosurface of the subtomogram average shows three distinct density layers, colored in three different colors: the plasma membrane (PM) and the plakophilin (PP) and plakoglobin layers (PG). The threshold is chosen so that the thickness of the central densities corresponding to the plakoglobin molecules is approximately 3.5 nm. The color coding varies as a function of the depth from red to blue. Individual layers are labeled with similar color. The interacting molecules form a zigzag pattern and are arranged in consecutive layers.Open in viewerModeling of the Plaque Components.To gain insights into the interactions between the desmosomal components, we modeled the plaque components from the available structures or structural homologues (SI Materials and Methods). The arm repeats of plakophilin and plakoglobin, and part of the cytoplasmic domains of E-cadherins, have been crystallized alone or in complex (17, 21). The structures of the cytoplasmic domains of desmoglein (Dsg) and desmocollin (Dsc) are not available. However, an alignment of their sequences with those of E-cadherin shows that most of the observed E-cadherin/β-catenin interactions are likely to be conserved in desmosomal cadherin/plakoglobin complexes (22). Therefore, we modeled plakoglobin-binding residues of desmosomal cadherins on the E-cadherin/β-catenin structure (22). Most of the cytoplasmic domain of Dscs (approximately 150 among approximately 200 aa) is modeled based on the E-cadherin/β-catenin structure. The cytoplasmic region of Dsg is significantly larger and cannot be accounted for in our model. We speculate that the remaining region of the cytoplasmic domains of Dsg could span the region between the ODP and IDP, as proposed from sequence analysis (23), and thus it is not shown in our map of the ODP. The residues closer to the membrane interact with the unstructured N terminus of the plakophilin and have been averaged out. However, in individual images, the connections are clearly visible. The N terminus of desmoplakin interacts with most of the ODP components. The N terminus consists of 1,056 aa, and based on analysis of sequence conservation, it was predicted to consist of two pairs of spectrin repeats interrupted by a putative Src homology 3 (SH3) domain (24). It has been shown that the plakin domain, consisting of the first 584 aa of the desmoplakin, interacts with plakophilin and plakoglobin. Furthermore, the colocalization of this plakin domain and of endogenous desmoplakin (DP) at cell–cell contacts, suggests that sequences necessary and sufficient to direct the association of DP with desmosomal plaque components during desmosome assembly are contained within the plakin domain. Importantly, the clustering of desmosomal cadherins and plakoglobin was observed only in the presence of the DP-NTP (N-terminal polypeptide containing the first 584 residues) (6). This domain alone could explain the density of the ODP as it was shown in DP-NTP–containing junctional structures that ultrastructurally exhibit ODPs closely resembling the plaque in normal desmosomal junctions (25). Based on these observations, we suggest that the remaining desmoplakin N terminus is localized further away from the ODP and is therefore not modeled. This plakin domain is a common feature of all plakin molecules including desmoplakin. Recently, a stable fragment of BPAG1, a major plakin protein localized to the hemidesmosomes, has been crystallized (24). The structure consists of two pairs of spectrin repeats, which share approximately 35% sequence identity with the plakin region of desmoplakin. Interestingly, this structure has significant structural similarity to α-catenin, the plaque protein of adherens junctions, despite the lack of significant sequence homology. β-Catenin mediates the interactions between α-catenin and E-cadherins, similar to the way in which plakoglobin mediates the interaction between desmoplakin and desmosomal cadherins. α-Catenin has been crystallized with the α-catenin binding helix of β-catenin [Protein Data Bank (PDB) ID code: 1dow]. Plakoglobin shares high sequence identity (>80%) with β-catenin. This high sequence identity is reflected by the substitution of plakoglobin by β-catenin in mouse tissues lacking plakoglobin (26). Given this high identity, we use the crystal structure of α-catenin/β-catenin (PDB ID code: 1dow) to fit into our EM density map. Although plakoglobin is common to both adherens junctions and desmosomes, α-catenin is excluded from desmosomes as a result of the overlap of binding sites of α-catenin and desmosomal cadherins, as has been shown by mutagenesis studies (7, 27). We suggest that this variation is a result of the subtle differences between desmoplakin and α-catenin in the binding sites in plakoglobin. This is supported by the observation that a few residues in the N terminus of the plakin domain can be highly divergent among members of the plakin family, including desmoplakin, which potentially contributes to the specificity of their biological functions (24). The residues at the tip of the desmoplakin N terminus were shown to interact with the plakophilin N terminus. This region is largely unstructured and thus it is likely to have been averaged out in the map.Fitting X-Ray Structures into the Density Map.The plakophilin layer consists of individual densities, the sizes of which match remarkably well to the size of the arm repeats of the plakophilin structure. The rotational placement is partially defined through the positions of the C- and N-termini, as determined from immuno-EM, and the underlying density, although the axial orientation of the molecules cannot be defined. The molecules are thus placed in the context of the densities as defined by five of the six degrees of freedom.The fitting of the molecules in the plakoglobin layer is significantly more demanding, because our resolution does not allow for direct recognition of the plakoglobin and the N-terminal part of desmoplakin. Placing these molecules into the density map by conventional cross-correlation methods only is ambiguous, given the limited resolution of the subtomogram average. By using the available information from various sources, we made the following assumptions: the orientation of the plakoglobin can be roughly set by the immunogold labeling studies, i.e., the C- and N-termini of the plakoglobin molecules are located closer and further away from the plasma membrane, respectively; the structures of desmoplakin and plakoglobin behave as rigid bodies; desmoplakin and plakoglobin build a complex that is flexibly tethered and is similar to β-catenin/α-catenin, as they are structural homologues; and the density map with the distinct zigzag pattern sets the best constraint in which the resulting structures should fit comfortably. In the following, we apply similar algorithms as described by Alber et al. (28, 29), with the main difference being that our main underlying information for the fitting is the density map.The first consideration for the fitting is the number of molecules involved in the plakoglobin layer. We set our artificial “unit cell” to include the equivalent of at least four cadherins, so the plakophilin layer has at least four molecules fitted. According to our density calculations, the plakoglobin layer should include either eight plakoglobin molecules with a stoichiometry of 2:1 (plakoglobin:Dsc) or four plakoglobin molecules and four desmoplakin molecules with a stoichiometry of 1:1 (plakoglobin:Dsc and desmoplakin:Dsc) (Fig. S6 A and B). In the first case, the desmoplakin molecules would be located outside the plakoglobin layer, and would be flexibly tethered to it, so that they smooth out during the averaging process, as no additional densities were obtained there. For the application of the genetic algorithms (GAs), we started with various configurations and various stoichiometries, with the three most prominent configurations presented in Fig. S4.The outcome of the GA shows an arrangement of plakoglobin/desmoplakin positioned at an angle of approximately 40° with respect to one another. Thus, the desmoplakin has to be bent approximately 100° compared with the arrangement of α/β-catenin suggested in Huber and Weis (22), which results in a good fit to the density map without any visible clashes (Fig. 3). This hinge flexibility can be associated with the presence of proline residues in the helical regions of β-catenin, which are rotated in the E-cadherin and XTcf-3 complexes.Fig. 3.Fitting of plakoglobin X-ray structures onto the symmetrized plakoglobin layer. (A) Crossed-eye stereo representation of the isosurface of the symmetrized subtomogram average of the plakoglobin layer (in beige) on which the X-ray structures of an alternating plakoglobin/desmoplakin (green/blue) complex has been placed. The cytoplasmic region of the cadherins is indicated in red. Five individual plakoglobin/desmoplakin complexes were accommodated into the density map. The zigzag structure of the plakoglobin layer is clearly visible. The desmoplakin molecules connect to the plakoglobin molecules at two positions: on the upper part close to the N terminus and in the central armadillo repeats. (B) The same representation as in A rotated 90°. Next to the zigzag structure shown in A, an additional connection between plakoglobins or other densities can be observed, indicating lateral connections in two directions. (C) The same representation as in A rotated 90° around a different axis. This is the typical view observed on 2D EM images. (D) Arbitrary perspective view of the same structure.Open in viewerMany sequences of Dsg and Dsc corresponding to sequences of E-cadherins observed in E-cadherin/β-catenin interactions are conserved in plakoglobin/desmosomal cadherin complexes. Furthermore, the corresponding residues of desmosomal cadherins at the hinge position have been suggested to be particularly important in plakoglobin/desmosomal cadherin interactions (22). We suggest that these residues might influence the rotation of the helical regions of plakoglobin, resulting in more flexible motion of the hinge.Our fitting results in three distinct configurations with very similar merit figures, and they outperform any other configuration (also with other stoichiometries) (Fig. S5 and Fig. S6). In the most favorable configuration, plakoglobin and desmoplakin molecules are arranged in alternating patterns (Fig. S6 E and F). In the configuration with alternating homophilic dimers of plakoglobin and desmoplakin (Fig. S6 C and D), we could not find any evidence of dimerization of plakoglobin. Even more significantly, it has been explicitly reported that the N-terminal part of α-catenin (the homologue of desmoplakin) does not dimerize when bound to β-catenin (30). Our configuration (Fig. 3) satisfies a number of pieces of biochemical evidence. Desmosomal cadherins are in a 1:1 stoichiometry with plakoglobin (21, 31). Our fitting implies a stoichiometry of desmoplakin and plakoglobin of 1:1. Furthermore, our fitting shows a second potential binding site of desmoplakin on the central arm repeats of plakoglobin. The multiple binding sites of desmoplakin on plakoglobin demonstrate unique properties of plakoglobin in recruiting desmoplakin to desmosomes, as it has been shown by mutagenesis studies (6). This function was shown in plakoglobin-KO keratinocytes, in which the cytoplasmic plaque appeared sparse and anchoring of IFs was defective (10, 26). Although the β-catenin was shown to substitute for plakoglobin in clustering desmosomal cadherins, which appeared intact in the extracellular region showing a dense midline, it was unable to recruit normal levels of desmoplakin to the plaque; this was manifested in a substantially less dense and thinner ODP, and the IDP was devoid of IFs in these cells.In contrast to previous EM studies, our resulting configuration provides direct verification of in situ stoichiometry of the plaque proteins, which partially verifies in vitro binding studies as well as revealing information about the stoichiometry. However, because of the limited resolution of our density map and imprecision of the positions determined by the immunogold labeling, we are unable to unambiguously assign the observed densities to individual plaque components. The reasons for this are twofold: (i) the available structures are relatively small to be fitted into cryo-ET images, and (ii) the available structures look very similar at the resolution obtained by electron tomographic studies. By integrating the information from immuno-EM, biochemical, and mutagenesis studies, our resulting configuration is the best possible explanation of the complex structure of the desmosomal plaque in situ. Our density map might be better explained if a significantly higher resolution map could be produced (with a resolution at approximately 1.5 nm), or if the interacting components were solved as complexes.Desmosomal Assembly.Our resulting 3D density map of the plaque and our previous density map of the extracellular space explain, at molecular resolution, the interdependence of the ordered structures observed intra- and extracellularly. This interdependence and matching of the order is illustrated in Fig. 4. The depiction clarifies the structural roles of the arm repeats of plakoglobin in interactions with both Dsg and Dsc; and the role of plakophilin, which interacts with desmosomal cadherins and desmoplakin through its N terminus (7, 27, 31, 32). Our results indicate that the arrangement of the extracellular domains we previously observed depends on an ordered structure within the plaque. Interestingly, the clustering of desmosomal cadherins and plakoglobin was observed only when the plakin domain of the desmoplakin was present (6). This order is important for maintaining tissue integrity. It has been shown that perturbation by phosphorylation of plaque components causes loss of order within the extracellular space and consequent loss or weakening of desmosomal adhesiveness associated with human genetic or autoimmune disease and wounds, respectively (33, 34). The observed matching of the periodic arrangement of both extracellular cadherins and the plaque supports these studies. The ordered structure of the plaque observed in our density map, as well as in regions in the vicinity of the desmosome, implies a sequential model of desmosomal assembly. We propose that the plakoglobin molecules provide a template on which the desmosomal cadherins cluster at the cell surface. Subsequently, cis- and trans-adhesive interactions are initiated between the extracellular domains of the cadherins. More and more cadherin/plakoglobin complexes are added to reinforce the newly formed junction. The plaque proteins desmoplakin and plakophilin are then added to the cadherin/plakoglobin scaffold as a molecular reinforcement to the junction by tethering to the IFs via the desmoplakin C terminus. Similar to the extracellular region of desmosome, the strong connection of the desmosomes to the cytoskeleton results from a cooperative mechanism in which a large number of molecules of the desmosomal plaque interact in a specific manner, resulting in a highly organized structure. Our density map suggests that the strong physical adhesion of desmosomes arises from molecular clustering of the plaque components forming both lateral and medial molecular connections.Fig. 4.The complete desmosome structure. The drawing combines the complete knowledge of the interactions of the various desmosomal components on the basis of the cryo-ET data. The interactions of both plaque components and the extracellular cadherins (16) are visualized in the map. Two molecular layers representing five to six unit cells in the extracellular and intracellular parts are shown. The plakoglobin molecules are depicted in green, the desmoplakin in light blue, plakophilins in purple, and the desmosomal cadherins (Dsg and Dsc) in two shades of red. The periodicity of the extracellular layer matches the periodicity of the plaque components remarkably well, suggesting that they are connected by their flexible cytoplasmic tails to the plakoglobin molecules.Open in viewerConclusionsThe organization of the cytoplasmic plaque of intercellular junctions such as desmosomes and adherens junctions, as well as ECM-cell focal adhesions and hemidesmosomes has been controversial; the major challenge is the molecular crowdedness. Although immunogold EM, biochemical, and mutagenesis studies have provided important information on the positions and interactions between the constituent proteins, the molecular architecture of how these proteins interact and are organized in the context of assembled junctions was missing. Our approach by using cryo-ET of vitreous sections combined with 3D averaging provides the arrangement of the proteins in situ and in vivo. In combination with constrained fitting, which integrates information from other techniques, the most probable 3D arrangement of the molecular players is presented. However, the resolution does not allow for the unambiguous identification of the constituent proteins. For this to be achieved, a twofold resolution improvement is necessary, given the similarity of the complexes involved; or alternatively, high-resolution structures with larger domains, ideally with more than one of the interacting molecules cocrystallized, are required. Our approach with cryo-ET of vitreous sections combined with 3D averaging is currently the only technique that has the potential to visualize the structural organization of the cytoplasmic surface of major intercellular junctions in normal and diseased tissue.Materials and MethodsHuman skin biopsy specimens 150 μm in size and 100 μm in thickness embedded in 1-hexadecence, immediately after extraction, were cryofixed in an EMPACT2 high-pressure freezer (Leica Microsystems). Cryosections of nominal thickness of 50 nm were generated in an EM FC6/UC6 ultramicrotome (Leica Microsystems) at −140 °C and at a cutting speed of 1.0 mm/s by using a 35° diamond knife (Diatome). The cryosections were collected in CFlat 4/2 200 or 300 mesh carbon copper grids (Electron Microscopy Science) and attached using a electrostatic charging device (Leica Microsystems). The cryosections were then labeled with PbS quantum dots of approximately 10 nm (Evident Technologies) according to the protocol of Masich et al. (35). Single-axis tilt series of desmosomal regions in the epidermis covering an angular range from −65° to +65° with 1° or 2° angular increment were recorded in a Tecnai G2 Polara microscope (FEI) that had been cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature and equipped with a postcolumn GIF 2002 energy filter (Gatan). The tilt series were recorded under low-dose conditions by using the UCSF tomography software (36). Images were recorded on a 2,000 × 2,000 pixel CCD camera at a defocus level between −9 and −4 μm (pixel sizes are 1 nm and 0.6 nm at the specimen level; Table S1). The total electron dose was approximately 4,000 e−/nm2 per tilt series. The projection images of the tilt series were aligned using the quantum dots. The merit figure of the aligned series used for the reconstruction and subsequent processing had a value of less than 0.6 nm, which indicates proper alignment and suggests that the section did not deform during the acquisition. We performed the reconstructions by using weighted back-projection algorithms and visualized them with isosurface- and volume-rendering techniques in the Amira software package (Mercury Computer Systems). Sequence similarity detection by HHM was used to model plakoglobin binding residues of Dsg based on the structure of epithelial cadherin (PDB ID code: 1i7w), plakophilin based on the solved human plakophilin structure (PDB ID code: 1xm9), and the desmoplakin/plakoglobin complex using structure of the complex α-catenin/β-catenin (PDB ID code: 1dow).Data AvailabilityData deposition: The EM density map reported in this paper has been deposited in the EBI Macromolecular Structure Database (accession no. EMD-1374).AcknowledgmentsWe thank W. Kuehlbrandt, B. Boettcher, and J. Dubochet for suggestions and critically reading the manuscript. We thank Zhou Yu for help with Fig. 4. This work was supported by FP6 Marie Curie mobility network grants and EMBO fellowships (to A.A.-A.), the FP6 3D repertoire network of excellence (R.B.R.), and an ERC Starting Grant (to A.S.F.).Supporting InformationSupporting Information (PDF)Supporting InformationDownload1.16 MBReferences1G McKoy, et al., Identification of a deletion in plakoglobin in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy with palmoplantar keratoderma and woolly hair (Naxos disease). Lancet355, 2119–2124 (2000).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar2JA McGrath, et al., Mutations in the plakophilin 1 gene result in ectodermal dysplasia/skin fragility syndrome. Nat Genet17, 240–244 (1997).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] is a hallmark of many blistering and cancer diseases b [...] is a hallmark of many blistering and cancer diseases c [...] constitutes most of the IDP and tethers to the IFs 3EA Bornslaeger, et al., Plakophilin 1 interferes with plakoglobin binding to desmoplakin, yet together with plakoglobin promotes clustering of desmosomal plaque complexes at cell-cell borders. J Cell Sci114, 727–738 (2001).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar4X Chen, S Bonne, M Hatzfeld, F van Roy, KJ Green, Protein binding and functional characterization of plakophilin 2. Evidence for its diverse roles in desmosomes and beta -catenin signaling. J Biol Chem277, 10512–10522 (2002).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar5HP Kapprell, K Owaribe, WW Franke, Identification of a basic protein of Mr 75,000 as an accessory desmosomal plaque protein in stratified and complex epithelia. J Cell Biol106, 1679–1691 (1988).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar6AP Kowalczyk, et al., The amino-terminal domain of desmoplakin binds to plakoglobin and clusters desmosomal cadherin-plakoglobin complexes. J Cell Biol139, 773–784 (1997).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] polypeptide containing the first 584 residues) b [...] as it has been shown by mutagenesis studies c [...] when the plakin domain of the desmoplakin was present 7RB Troyanovsky, NA Chitaev, SM Troyanovsky, Cadherin binding sites of plakoglobin: Localization, specificity and role in targeting to adhering junctions. J Cell Sci109, 3069–3078 (1996).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] cadherins, as has been shown by mutagenesis studies b [...] cadherins and desmoplakin through its N terminus 8EA Smith, E Fuchs, Defining the interactions between intermediate filaments and desmosomes. J Cell Biol141, 1229–1241 (1998).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar9W He, P Cowin, DL Stokes, Untangling desmosomal knots with electron tomography. Science302, 109–113 (2003).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar10D Acehan, et al., Plakoglobin is required for effective intermediate filament anchorage to desmosomes. J Invest Dermatol128, 2665–2675 (2008).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar11AJ North, et al., Molecular map of the desmosomal plaque. J Cell Sci112, 4325–4336 (1999).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] without significant distinguishable features b [...] of the plakophilin and plakoglobin, respectively 12A Al-Amoudi, et al., Cryo-electron microscopy of vitreous sections. EMBO J23, 3583–3588 (2004).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar13A Al-Amoudi, D Studer, J Dubochet, Cutting artefacts and cutting process in vitreous sections for cryo-electron microscopy. J Struct Biol150, 109–121 (2005).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar14J Pierson, U Ziese, M Sani, PJ Peters, Exploring vitreous cryo-section-induced compression at the macromolecular level using electron cryo-tomography; 80S yeast ribosomes appear unaffected. J Struct Biol173, 345–349 (2010).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar15J Pierson, et al., Improving the technique of vitreous cryo-sectioning for cryo-electron tomography: Electrostatic charging for section attachment and implementation of an anti-contamination glove box. J Struct Biol169, 219–225 (2010).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar16A Al-Amoudi, DC Díez, MJ Betts, AS Frangakis, The molecular architecture of cadherins in native epidermal desmosomes. Nature450, 832–837 (2007).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] previously revealed by cryo-ET of vitreous sections b [...] properties, with subsequent translational alignment c [...] to the cadherin arrangement of the extracellular space d [...] both plaque components and the extracellular cadherins 17HJ Choi, WI Weis, Structure of the armadillo repeat domain of plakophilin 1. J Mol Biol346, 367–376 (2005).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] to the structure of the arm repeats of the plakophilin b [...] have been crystallized alone or in complex 18DE Kelly, AM Kuda, Traversing filaments in desmosomal and hemidesmosomal attachments: Freeze-fracture approaches toward their characterization. Anat Rec199, 1–14 (1981).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar19NS McNutt, RS Weinstein, Membrane ultrastructure at mammalian intercellular junctions. Prog Biophys Mol Biol26, 45–101 (1973).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar20K Miller, D Mattey, H Measures, C Hopkins, D Garrod, Localisation of the protein and glycoprotein components of bovine nasal epithelial desmosomes by immunoelectron microscopy. EMBO J6, 885–889 (1987).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar21HJ Choi, JC Gross, S Pokutta, WI Weis, Interactions of plakoglobin and beta-catenin with desmosomal cadherins: basis of selective exclusion of alpha- and beta-catenin from desmosomes. J Biol Chem284, 31776–31788 (2009).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] have been crystallized alone or in complex b [...] cadherins are in a 1:1 stoichiometry with plakoglobin 22AH Huber, WI Weis, The structure of the beta-catenin/E-cadherin complex and the molecular basis of diverse ligand recognition by beta-catenin. Cell105, 391–402 (2001).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] conserved in desmosomal cadherin/plakoglobin complexes b [...] cadherins on the E-cadherin/β-catenin structure c [...] arrangement of α/β-catenin suggested in Huber and Weis d [...] in plakoglobin/desmosomal cadherin interactions 23LA Nilles, et al., Structural analysis and expression of human desmoglein: A cadherin-like component of the desmosome. J Cell Sci99, 809–821 (1991).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar24JJ Jefferson, C Ciatto, L Shapiro, RK Liem, Structural analysis of the plakin domain of bullous pemphigoid antigen1 (BPAG1) suggests that plakins are members of the spectrin superfamily. J Mol Biol366, 244–257 (2007).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] interrupted by a putative Src homology 3 (SH3) domain b [...] localized to the hemidesmosomes, has been crystallized c [...] to the specificity of their biological functions 25EA Bornslaeger, CM Corcoran, TS Stappenbeck, KJ Green, Breaking the connection: displacement of the desmosomal plaque protein desmoplakin from cell-cell interfaces disrupts anchorage of intermediate filament bundles and alters intercellular junction assembly. J Cell Biol134, 985–1001 (1996).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar26C Bierkamp, H Schwarz, O Huber, R Kemler, Desmosomal localization of beta-catenin in the skin of plakoglobin null-mutant mice. Development126, 371–381 (1999).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] by β-catenin in mouse tissues lacking plakoglobin b [...] appeared sparse and anchoring of IFs was defective 27LL Witcher, et al., Desmosomal cadherin binding domains of plakoglobin. J Biol Chem271, 10904–10909 (1996).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] cadherins, as has been shown by mutagenesis studies b [...] cadherins and desmoplakin through its N terminus 28F Alber, et al., Determining the architectures of macromolecular assemblies. Nature450, 683–694 (2007).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar29F Alber, et al., The molecular architecture of the nuclear pore complex. Nature450, 695–701 (2007).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar30S Pokutta, WI Weis, Structure of the dimerization and beta-catenin-binding region of alpha-catenin. Mol Cell5, 533–543 (2000).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar31NA Chitaev, AZ Averbakh, RB Troyanovsky, SM Troyanovsky, Molecular organization of the desmoglein-plakoglobin complex. J Cell Sci111, 1941–1949 (1998).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] cadherins are in a 1:1 stoichiometry with plakoglobin b [...] cadherins and desmoplakin through its N terminus 32JK Wahl, et al., Plakoglobin domains that define its association with the desmosomal cadherins and the classical cadherins: Identification of unique and shared domains. J Cell Sci109, 1143–1154 (1996).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar33M Amagai, Adhesion molecules. I: Keratinocyte-keratinocyte interactions; cadherins and pemphigus. J Invest Dermatol104, 146–152 (1995).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar34S Sen-Chowdhry, MD Lowe, SC Sporton, WJ McKenna, Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy: Clinical presentation, diagnosis, and management. Am J Med117, 685–695 (2004).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar35S Masich, T Ostberg, L Norlén, O Shupliakov, B Daneholt, A procedure to deposit fiducial markers on vitreous cryo-sections for cellular tomography. J Struct Biol156, 461–468 (2006).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar36SQ Zheng, et al., UCSF tomography: An integrated software suite for real-time electron microscopic tomographic data collection, alignment, and reconstruction. J Struct Biol157, 138–147 (2007).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle ScholarShow all referencesInformation & AuthorsInformationAuthorsInformationPublished inCover image: Pictured is a genetically engineered Arabidopsis plant. Although the mechanisms are not well understood, in Arabidopsis, one-third of the genes required for embryo development encode proteins in DNA-containing organelles known as plastids. Elena Babiychuk et al. analyzed postembryonic mutant phenotypes and show that plastid-derived, systemic growth-promoting compounds link plant development and plastid gene expression. See the article by Babiychuk et al. on pages 6674–6679. Image courtesy of Elena Babiychuk.Proceedings of the National Academy of SciencesVol. 108 | No. 16April 19, 2011PubMed: 21464301ClassificationsBiological SciencesCell BiologyCopyrightFreely available online through the PNAS open access option.Data AvailabilityData deposition: The EM density map reported in this paper has been deposited in the EBI Macromolecular Structure Database (accession no. EMD-1374).Submission historyPublished online: April 4, 2011Published in issue: April 19, 2011Keywordsvitreous sectioningimage processinggenetic algorithmsmulti-protein fittingAcknowledgmentsWe thank W. Kuehlbrandt, B. Boettcher, and J. Dubochet for suggestions and critically reading the manuscript. We thank Zhou Yu for help with Fig. 4. This work was supported by FP6 Marie Curie mobility network grants and EMBO fellowships (to A.A.-A.), the FP6 3D repertoire network of excellence (R.B.R.), and an ERC Starting Grant (to A.S.F.).NotesThis article is a PNAS Direct Submission.AuthorsAffiliationsExpand AllAshrafAl-AmoudiStructural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany;Present address: Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen, 53175 Bonn, Germany.View all articles by this authorDanielCastaño-DiezStructural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany;View all articles by this authorDamien P.DevosStructural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany;Present address: Center for Cellular Imaging and Nanoanalytics (C-CINA), Biozentrum, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland.View all articles by this authorRobert B.RussellStructural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany;Cell Networks, University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany;View all articles by this authorGraham T.JohnsonThe Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037; andView all articles by this authorAchilleas S.Frangakis3achilleas.frangakis@biophysik.orgStructural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany;Frankfurt Institute for Molecular Life Science and Institute of Biophysics, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60438 Frankfurt, GermanyView all articles by this authorNotes3To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: achilleas.frangakis@biophysik.org.Author contributions: A.A.-A. and A.S.F. designed research; A.A.-A. and A.S.F. performed research; D.P.D., R.B.R., and G.T.J. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; A.S.F. and D.C.-D. analyzed data; and A.A.-A. and A.S.F. wrote the paper.Competing InterestsThe authors declare no conflict of interest.Metrics & CitationsMetricsCitationsMetricsArticle usageViewsCitationsNo data available.020406080Jan 2012Jan 2014Jan 2016Jan 2018Jan 2020Jan 2022Jan 20245,09561Total6 Months12 MonthsTotal number of
                views and citations



        
        Note: The article usage is presented with a three- to four-day delay and will update daily once available. Due to ths delay, usage data will not appear immediately following publication. Citation information is sourced from Crossref Cited-by service.

                Citation statements
            797580Smart Citations797580Citing PublicationsSupportingMentioningContrastingView CitationsSee how this article has been cited at scite.aiscite shows how a scientific paper has been cited by providing the context of the citation, a classification describing whether it supports, mentions, or contrasts the cited claim, and a label indicating in which section the citation was made.
                Altmetrics
            See more details
          Posted by 1 X users
      89 readers on Mendeley
          Citations
		If you have the appropriate software installed, you can download article citation data to the citation manager of your choice. Simply select your manager software from the list below and click Download.
	FormatPlease select one from the listRIS (ProCite, Reference Manager)EndNoteBibTexMedlarsRefWorksDirect ImportCited byLoading...View OptionsView optionsPDF formatDownload this article as a PDF fileDOWNLOAD PDFMediaFiguresTablesOtherFiguresFig. 1.Ultrastructure of the desmosome from human epidermis. (A) Two-dimensional projection image of a straight desmosome shows the periodic structure in extracellular and intracellular regions. The extracellular desmosomal cadherins appear as electron-dense protrusions extending from the plasma membrane (PM) to a dense midline (DM), showing a pronounced periodicity (purple boxed area). At the intracellular region (IC), two layers with different levels of intensity (green and blue highlighted area) can be observed, corresponding to the plakophilin and plakoglobin layers. (B) A 6-nm-thick tomographic slice shows details of the desmosomal interactions in extracellular and intracellular spaces. cis interactions (cadherin emanating from the same cell) are highlighted by the orange arrows; trans interactions (cadherins emanating from juxtaposed cells), with the characteristic “W” shape, are boxed in the orange areas. The density profile of C is indicated on the image. (C) Graph of relative density as projected orthogonally to the normal of the plasma membrane (in three different colors corresponding to the different regions of the desmosome). The plasma membranes have the highest density, followed by the plakoglobin (PG) layer with a similar density to the dense midline, and finally the plakophilin (PP) layer with the lowest density. The comparable densities between the plakoglobin layer and the dense midline indicate a similar number of proteins clustering at these regions. (D) Superimposed autocorrelation function calculated at various positions of the desmosomal plaque (indicated with blue box in B) shows that the plaque has a periodicity of approximately 7 nm, which matches that of the extracellular region. (Scale bars: A and B, 40 nm.)Go to FigureOpen in ViewerFig. 2.Three-dimensional average of desmosomal plaque. (A) Illustration shows isosurface of the 3D average (350 subtomograms) of the intracellular part of the desmosome and the computational sections along the three axes visualized in B–E. (B) Coronal slice (0.6 nm thick) through the subtomogram average (as indicated by the letters in the illustration) show that the molecules in the plakoglobin layer form a zigzag pattern. The plakoglobin layer does not have obvious connections to the plakophilin layer. The area between the two regions appears smooth, electron-lucent, and unstructured. (C) Sagittal slice (0.6 nm thick) through the subtomogram average. The cross-sections of two molecules are shown, showing a remarkable similarity to the cross-sections of plakoglobin molecules. (D and E) Two 0.6-nm-thick axial slices through the plakophilin and the plakoglobin layers, respectively (E and F). A clear periodicity can be observed in both layers. Superposition of the two layers shows that the molecules in the plakophilin layer are shifted with respect to the plakoglobin layer, and are hence accessible from the cytoplasmic side. (E) Interconnections between the various molecules are visible. (Scale bars: 7 nm.) (B) The isosurface of the subtomogram average shows three distinct density layers, colored in three different colors: the plasma membrane (PM) and the plakophilin (PP) and plakoglobin layers (PG). The threshold is chosen so that the thickness of the central densities corresponding to the plakoglobin molecules is approximately 3.5 nm. The color coding varies as a function of the depth from red to blue. Individual layers are labeled with similar color. The interacting molecules form a zigzag pattern and are arranged in consecutive layers.Go to FigureOpen in ViewerFig. 3.Fitting of plakoglobin X-ray structures onto the symmetrized plakoglobin layer. (A) Crossed-eye stereo representation of the isosurface of the symmetrized subtomogram average of the plakoglobin layer (in beige) on which the X-ray structures of an alternating plakoglobin/desmoplakin (green/blue) complex has been placed. The cytoplasmic region of the cadherins is indicated in red. Five individual plakoglobin/desmoplakin complexes were accommodated into the density map. The zigzag structure of the plakoglobin layer is clearly visible. The desmoplakin molecules connect to the plakoglobin molecules at two positions: on the upper part close to the N terminus and in the central armadillo repeats. (B) The same representation as in A rotated 90°. Next to the zigzag structure shown in A, an additional connection between plakoglobins or other densities can be observed, indicating lateral connections in two directions. (C) The same representation as in A rotated 90° around a different axis. This is the typical view observed on 2D EM images. (D) Arbitrary perspective view of the same structure.Go to FigureOpen in ViewerFig. 4.The complete desmosome structure. The drawing combines the complete knowledge of the interactions of the various desmosomal components on the basis of the cryo-ET data. The interactions of both plaque components and the extracellular cadherins (16) are visualized in the map. Two molecular layers representing five to six unit cells in the extracellular and intracellular parts are shown. The plakoglobin molecules are depicted in green, the desmoplakin in light blue, plakophilins in purple, and the desmosomal cadherins (Dsg and Dsc) in two shades of red. The periodicity of the extracellular layer matches the periodicity of the plaque components remarkably well, suggesting that they are connected by their flexible cytoplasmic tails to the plakoglobin molecules.Go to FigureOpen in ViewerTablesOtherShareShareShare article linkhttps://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.1019469108COPY LINKCopied!Copying failed.Share on social mediaFacebookX (formerly Twitter)LinkedInGmailemailReferencesReferences1G McKoy, et al., Identification of a deletion in plakoglobin in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy with palmoplantar keratoderma and woolly hair (Naxos disease). Lancet355, 2119–2124 (2000).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar2JA McGrath, et al., Mutations in the plakophilin 1 gene result in ectodermal dysplasia/skin fragility syndrome. Nat Genet17, 240–244 (1997).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] is a hallmark of many blistering and cancer diseases b [...] is a hallmark of many blistering and cancer diseases c [...] constitutes most of the IDP and tethers to the IFs 3EA Bornslaeger, et al., Plakophilin 1 interferes with plakoglobin binding to desmoplakin, yet together with plakoglobin promotes clustering of desmosomal plaque complexes at cell-cell borders. J Cell Sci114, 727–738 (2001).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar4X Chen, S Bonne, M Hatzfeld, F van Roy, KJ Green, Protein binding and functional characterization of plakophilin 2. Evidence for its diverse roles in desmosomes and beta -catenin signaling. J Biol Chem277, 10512–10522 (2002).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar5HP Kapprell, K Owaribe, WW Franke, Identification of a basic protein of Mr 75,000 as an accessory desmosomal plaque protein in stratified and complex epithelia. J Cell Biol106, 1679–1691 (1988).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar6AP Kowalczyk, et al., The amino-terminal domain of desmoplakin binds to plakoglobin and clusters desmosomal cadherin-plakoglobin complexes. J Cell Biol139, 773–784 (1997).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] polypeptide containing the first 584 residues) b [...] as it has been shown by mutagenesis studies c [...] when the plakin domain of the desmoplakin was present 7RB Troyanovsky, NA Chitaev, SM Troyanovsky, Cadherin binding sites of plakoglobin: Localization, specificity and role in targeting to adhering junctions. J Cell Sci109, 3069–3078 (1996).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] cadherins, as has been shown by mutagenesis studies b [...] cadherins and desmoplakin through its N terminus 8EA Smith, E Fuchs, Defining the interactions between intermediate filaments and desmosomes. J Cell Biol141, 1229–1241 (1998).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar9W He, P Cowin, DL Stokes, Untangling desmosomal knots with electron tomography. Science302, 109–113 (2003).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar10D Acehan, et al., Plakoglobin is required for effective intermediate filament anchorage to desmosomes. J Invest Dermatol128, 2665–2675 (2008).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar11AJ North, et al., Molecular map of the desmosomal plaque. J Cell Sci112, 4325–4336 (1999).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] without significant distinguishable features b [...] of the plakophilin and plakoglobin, respectively 12A Al-Amoudi, et al., Cryo-electron microscopy of vitreous sections. EMBO J23, 3583–3588 (2004).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar13A Al-Amoudi, D Studer, J Dubochet, Cutting artefacts and cutting process in vitreous sections for cryo-electron microscopy. J Struct Biol150, 109–121 (2005).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar14J Pierson, U Ziese, M Sani, PJ Peters, Exploring vitreous cryo-section-induced compression at the macromolecular level using electron cryo-tomography; 80S yeast ribosomes appear unaffected. J Struct Biol173, 345–349 (2010).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar15J Pierson, et al., Improving the technique of vitreous cryo-sectioning for cryo-electron tomography: Electrostatic charging for section attachment and implementation of an anti-contamination glove box. J Struct Biol169, 219–225 (2010).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar16A Al-Amoudi, DC Díez, MJ Betts, AS Frangakis, The molecular architecture of cadherins in native epidermal desmosomes. Nature450, 832–837 (2007).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] previously revealed by cryo-ET of vitreous sections b [...] properties, with subsequent translational alignment c [...] to the cadherin arrangement of the extracellular space d [...] both plaque components and the extracellular cadherins 17HJ Choi, WI Weis, Structure of the armadillo repeat domain of plakophilin 1. J Mol Biol346, 367–376 (2005).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] to the structure of the arm repeats of the plakophilin b [...] have been crystallized alone or in complex 18DE Kelly, AM Kuda, Traversing filaments in desmosomal and hemidesmosomal attachments: Freeze-fracture approaches toward their characterization. Anat Rec199, 1–14 (1981).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar19NS McNutt, RS Weinstein, Membrane ultrastructure at mammalian intercellular junctions. Prog Biophys Mol Biol26, 45–101 (1973).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar20K Miller, D Mattey, H Measures, C Hopkins, D Garrod, Localisation of the protein and glycoprotein components of bovine nasal epithelial desmosomes by immunoelectron microscopy. EMBO J6, 885–889 (1987).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar21HJ Choi, JC Gross, S Pokutta, WI Weis, Interactions of plakoglobin and beta-catenin with desmosomal cadherins: basis of selective exclusion of alpha- and beta-catenin from desmosomes. J Biol Chem284, 31776–31788 (2009).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] have been crystallized alone or in complex b [...] cadherins are in a 1:1 stoichiometry with plakoglobin 22AH Huber, WI Weis, The structure of the beta-catenin/E-cadherin complex and the molecular basis of diverse ligand recognition by beta-catenin. Cell105, 391–402 (2001).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] conserved in desmosomal cadherin/plakoglobin complexes b [...] cadherins on the E-cadherin/β-catenin structure c [...] arrangement of α/β-catenin suggested in Huber and Weis d [...] in plakoglobin/desmosomal cadherin interactions 23LA Nilles, et al., Structural analysis and expression of human desmoglein: A cadherin-like component of the desmosome. J Cell Sci99, 809–821 (1991).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar24JJ Jefferson, C Ciatto, L Shapiro, RK Liem, Structural analysis of the plakin domain of bullous pemphigoid antigen1 (BPAG1) suggests that plakins are members of the spectrin superfamily. J Mol Biol366, 244–257 (2007).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] interrupted by a putative Src homology 3 (SH3) domain b [...] localized to the hemidesmosomes, has been crystallized c [...] to the specificity of their biological functions 25EA Bornslaeger, CM Corcoran, TS Stappenbeck, KJ Green, Breaking the connection: displacement of the desmosomal plaque protein desmoplakin from cell-cell interfaces disrupts anchorage of intermediate filament bundles and alters intercellular junction assembly. J Cell Biol134, 985–1001 (1996).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar26C Bierkamp, H Schwarz, O Huber, R Kemler, Desmosomal localization of beta-catenin in the skin of plakoglobin null-mutant mice. Development126, 371–381 (1999).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] by β-catenin in mouse tissues lacking plakoglobin b [...] appeared sparse and anchoring of IFs was defective 27LL Witcher, et al., Desmosomal cadherin binding domains of plakoglobin. J Biol Chem271, 10904–10909 (1996).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] cadherins, as has been shown by mutagenesis studies b [...] cadherins and desmoplakin through its N terminus 28F Alber, et al., Determining the architectures of macromolecular assemblies. Nature450, 683–694 (2007).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar29F Alber, et al., The molecular architecture of the nuclear pore complex. Nature450, 695–701 (2007).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar30S Pokutta, WI Weis, Structure of the dimerization and beta-catenin-binding region of alpha-catenin. Mol Cell5, 533–543 (2000).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar31NA Chitaev, AZ Averbakh, RB Troyanovsky, SM Troyanovsky, Molecular organization of the desmoglein-plakoglobin complex. J Cell Sci111, 1941–1949 (1998).CrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholara [...] cadherins are in a 1:1 stoichiometry with plakoglobin b [...] cadherins and desmoplakin through its N terminus 32JK Wahl, et al., Plakoglobin domains that define its association with the desmosomal cadherins and the classical cadherins: Identification of unique and shared domains. J Cell Sci109, 1143–1154 (1996).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar33M Amagai, Adhesion molecules. I: Keratinocyte-keratinocyte interactions; cadherins and pemphigus. J Invest Dermatol104, 146–152 (1995).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar34S Sen-Chowdhry, MD Lowe, SC Sporton, WJ McKenna, Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy: Clinical presentation, diagnosis, and management. Am J Med117, 685–695 (2004).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar35S Masich, T Ostberg, L Norlén, O Shupliakov, B Daneholt, A procedure to deposit fiducial markers on vitreous cryo-sections for cellular tomography. J Struct Biol156, 461–468 (2006).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle Scholar36SQ Zheng, et al., UCSF tomography: An integrated software suite for real-time electron microscopic tomographic data collection, alignment, and reconstruction. J Struct Biol157, 138–147 (2007).Go to referenceCrossrefPubMedGoogle ScholarView full text|Download PDF
                Further reading in this issue
            Research ArticleMarch 30, 2011Phenotypic heterogeneity and instability of human ovarian tumor-initiating cellsJocelyn M. Stewart,Patricia A. Shaw,Craig Gedye,Marcus Q. Bernardini,Benjamin G. Neel,[...]Laurie E. Ailles,+3 authorsThis is an addendum toComplex viscosity of helical and doubly helical polymeric liquids from general rigid bead-rod theoryResearch ArticleApril 1, 2011AMP kinase-related kinase NUAK2 affects tumor growth, migration, and clinical outcome of human melanomaTakeshi Namiki,Atsushi Tanemura,Julio C. Valencia,Sergio G. Coelho,Thierry Passeron,Masakazu Kawaguchi,Wilfred D. Vieira,Masashi Ishikawa,Wataru Nishijima,Toshiyuki Izumo,Yasuhiko Kaneko,Ichiro Katayama,Yuji Yamaguchi,Lanlan Yin,Eric C. Polley,Hongfang Liu,Yutaka Kawakami,Yoshinobu Eishi,Eishi Takahashi,Hiroo Yokozeki,[...]Vincent J. Hearing,+18 authorsThis is an addendum toComplex viscosity of helical and doubly helical polymeric liquids from general rigid bead-rod theoryResearch ArticleMarch 30, 2011Eukaryotic translation initiation factor (eIF) 5A stimulates protein synthesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeAllen Henderson,[...]John W. Hershey,+0 authorsThis is an addendum toComplex viscosity of helical and doubly helical polymeric liquids from general rigid bead-rod theory
            TrendingResearch ArticleSeptember 16, 2024Physician–patient racial concordance and newborn mortalityAn influential study suggests that Black newborns experience much lower mortality
   when attended by Black physicians after birth. Using the same data, we replicate those
   findings and estimate alternative models that include controls for very ...The racial gap in infant mortality is a pressing public-health concern, and [B. N.
   Greenwood et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.117, 21194–21200 (2020), 10.1073/pnas.1913405117] suggest that Black newborns are more likely to survive if cared for by ...George J. Borjas,[...]Robert VerBruggen,+0 authorsThis is an addendum toComplex viscosity of helical and doubly helical polymeric liquids from general rigid bead-rod theoryResearch ArticleDecember 30, 2013Bodily maps of emotionsEmotions coordinate our behavior and physiological states during survival-salient
   events and pleasurable interactions. Even though we are often consciously aware of
   our current emotional state, such as anger or happiness, the mechanisms giving ...Emotions are often felt in the body, and somatosensory feedback has been proposed
   to trigger conscious emotional experiences. Here we reveal maps of bodily sensations
   associated with different emotions using a unique topographical self-report method.
   In ...Lauri Nummenmaa,Enrico Glerean,Riitta Hari,[...]Jari K. Hietanen,+1 authorsThis is an addendum toComplex viscosity of helical and doubly helical polymeric liquids from general rigid bead-rod theoryResearch ArticleDecember 7, 2020Comparing crime rates between undocumented immigrants, legal immigrants, and native-born US citizens in TexasDespite its centrality to public and political discourse, we lack even basic information
   on fundamental questions regarding undocumented immigrants and crime. This stems largely
   from data constraints. Going beyond existing research, we utilize ...We make use of uniquely comprehensive arrest data from the Texas Department of Public
   Safety to compare the criminality of undocumented immigrants to legal immigrants and
   native-born US citizens between 2012 and 2018. We find that undocumented immigrants
   ...Michael T. Light,Jingying He,[...]Jason P. Robey and+0 authorsThis is an addendum toComplex viscosity of helical and doubly helical polymeric liquids from general rigid bead-rod theoryRecommended articlesResearch ArticleFebruary 12, 2008Near-atomic resolution using electron cryomicroscopy and single-particle reconstructionThis is an addendum toComplex viscosity of helical and doubly helical polymeric liquids from general rigid bead-rod theoryResearch ArticleJuly 20, 1999Three-dimensional structure of low density lipoproteins by electron cryomicroscopyThis is an addendum toComplex viscosity of helical and doubly helical polymeric liquids from general rigid bead-rod theoryResearch ArticleFebruary 16, 2010Three-dimensional structure of tropism-switching Bordetella bacteriophageThis is an addendum toComplex viscosity of helical and doubly helical polymeric liquids from general rigid bead-rod theoryNOW READING:The three-dimensional molecular structure of the desmosomal plaqueShareTrack CitationsAdd to Reading ListPDF/EPUBFiguresTablesView figureFig. 1.Ultrastructure of the desmosome from human epidermis. (A) Two-dimensional projection image of a straight desmosome shows the periodic structure in extracellular and intracellular regions. The extracellular desmosomal cadherins appear as electron-dense protrusions extending from the plasma membrane (PM) to a dense midline (DM), showing a pronounced periodicity (purple boxed area). At the intracellular region (IC), two layers with different levels of intensity (green and blue highlighted area) can be observed, corresponding to the plakophilin and plakoglobin layers. (B) A 6-nm-thick tomographic slice shows details of the desmosomal interactions in extracellular and intracellular spaces. cis interactions (cadherin emanating from the same cell) are highlighted by the orange arrows; trans interactions (cadherins emanating from juxtaposed cells), with the characteristic “W” shape, are boxed in the orange areas. The density profile of C is indicated on the image. (C) Graph of relative density as projected orthogonally to the normal of the plasma membrane (in three different colors corresponding to the different regions of the desmosome). The plasma membranes have the highest density, followed by the plakoglobin (PG) layer with a similar density to the dense midline, and finally the plakophilin (PP) layer with the lowest density. The comparable densities between the plakoglobin layer and the dense midline indicate a similar number of proteins clustering at these regions. (D) Superimposed autocorrelation function calculated at various positions of the desmosomal plaque (indicated with blue box in B) shows that the plaque has a periodicity of approximately 7 nm, which matches that of the extracellular region. (Scale bars: A and B, 40 nm.)View figureFig. 2.Three-dimensional average of desmosomal plaque. (A) Illustration shows isosurface of the 3D average (350 subtomograms) of the intracellular part of the desmosome and the computational sections along the three axes visualized in B–E. (B) Coronal slice (0.6 nm thick) through the subtomogram average (as indicated by the letters in the illustration) show that the molecules in the plakoglobin layer form a zigzag pattern. The plakoglobin layer does not have obvious connections to the plakophilin layer. The area between the two regions appears smooth, electron-lucent, and unstructured. (C) Sagittal slice (0.6 nm thick) through the subtomogram average. The cross-sections of two molecules are shown, showing a remarkable similarity to the cross-sections of plakoglobin molecules. (D and E) Two 0.6-nm-thick axial slices through the plakophilin and the plakoglobin layers, respectively (E and F). A clear periodicity can be observed in both layers. Superposition of the two layers shows that the molecules in the plakophilin layer are shifted with respect to the plakoglobin layer, and are hence accessible from the cytoplasmic side. (E) Interconnections between the various molecules are visible. (Scale bars: 7 nm.) (B) The isosurface of the subtomogram average shows three distinct density layers, colored in three different colors: the plasma membrane (PM) and the plakophilin (PP) and plakoglobin layers (PG). The threshold is chosen so that the thickness of the central densities corresponding to the plakoglobin molecules is approximately 3.5 nm. The color coding varies as a function of the depth from red to blue. Individual layers are labeled with similar color. The interacting molecules form a zigzag pattern and are arranged in consecutive layers.View figureFig. 3.Fitting of plakoglobin X-ray structures onto the symmetrized plakoglobin layer. (A) Crossed-eye stereo representation of the isosurface of the symmetrized subtomogram average of the plakoglobin layer (in beige) on which the X-ray structures of an alternating plakoglobin/desmoplakin (green/blue) complex has been placed. The cytoplasmic region of the cadherins is indicated in red. Five individual plakoglobin/desmoplakin complexes were accommodated into the density map. The zigzag structure of the plakoglobin layer is clearly visible. The desmoplakin molecules connect to the plakoglobin molecules at two positions: on the upper part close to the N terminus and in the central armadillo repeats. (B) The same representation as in A rotated 90°. Next to the zigzag structure shown in A, an additional connection between plakoglobins or other densities can be observed, indicating lateral connections in two directions. (C) The same representation as in A rotated 90° around a different axis. This is the typical view observed on 2D EM images. (D) Arbitrary perspective view of the same structure.View figureFig. 4.The complete desmosome structure. The drawing combines the complete knowledge of the interactions of the various desmosomal components on the basis of the cryo-ET data. The interactions of both plaque components and the extracellular cadherins (16) are visualized in the map. Two molecular layers representing five to six unit cells in the extracellular and intracellular parts are shown. The plakoglobin molecules are depicted in green, the desmoplakin in light blue, plakophilins in purple, and the desmosomal cadherins (Dsg and Dsc) in two shades of red. The periodicity of the extracellular layer matches the periodicity of the plaque components remarkably well, suggesting that they are connected by their flexible cytoplasmic tails to the plakoglobin molecules.Reference #1Sign up for thePNAS Highlights newsletterGet in-depth science stories sent to your inbox twice a month.SubscribeBrowseCurrent IssuePNAS NexusSpecial FeaturesList of IssuesCollected PapersPNAS In The NewsFront MatterJournal ClubMultimediaPodcastsInformationAboutDiversity and InclusionEditorial BoardAuthorsReviewersSubscribersLibrariansPressCozzarelli PrizePNAS UpdatesBack to topCopyright © 2024 National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. | Online ISSN 1091-6490PNAS is a partner of CHORUS, CLOCKSS, COPE, CrossRef, ORCID, and Research4Life.ContactSite MapTerms & Privacy PolicyAccessibilityRequest UsernamexCloseCan't sign in? Forgot your username? 
                        Enter your email address below and we will send you your usernameEmailSubmitIf the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your usernameCreate a new accountxCloseEmail
                                
                                Returning user
                            SubmitWe use cookies on this site to enhance your user experience. By using this website, you are giving your consent for us to set cookies. Find out moreCONTINUELoginxCloseEmail*Password*Forgot your password? Reset it here
                        Keep me logged in
                    LoginDon’t have an account? Register
                    here
                
                            Institutional Login
                        Change Password xCloseEnter the verification codeSubmitCongrats!Your Phone has been verified18001801180218031804✓Thanks for sharing!AddToAnyMore…__("articleCrossmark.closePopup")PDFHelp------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

